Ref. Ares(2013)2872799 - 13/08/2013 
 
ARTICLE 29 Data Protection Working Party  
 
  
 
This Working Party was set up under Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC. It is an independent European advisory body on data 
protection and privacy. Its tasks are described in Article 30 of Directive 95/46/EC and Article 15 of Directive 2002/58/EC. 
 
The secretariat is provided by Directorate C (Fundamental Rights and Union Citizenship) of the European Commission, 
Directorate General Justice, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium, Office No MO-59 02/13. 
 
Website: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/index_en.htm  
 
Brussels, 13 August 2013  
Viviane Reding 
Vice President 
Commissioner for Justice, Fundamental 
Rights and Citizenship 
European Commission 
B - 1049 BRUSSELS Belgium  
Dear Vice President Reding, 
The recent Prism controversy and related disclosures on the collection of and access by the 
American intelligence community to data on non-US persons1 are of great concern to the 
international data protection community, including the members of the Article 29 Working 
Party (hereafter: WP29). Especially alarming are the latest revelations with regard to the so-
called XKeyscore, which allegedly allows for the collection and analysis of the content of 
internet communication from around the world. Even though some clarifications have been 
given by the United States’ authorities2, many questions as to the consequences of these 
intelligence programs remain. Let me stress that the WP29 understands that on national 
security grounds different countries make different decisions on what information can or 
should be used to find leads and prevent, investigate or detect attacks against a country, or 
even for purposes of political and economic surveillance. At the same time, also in case of the 
protection of national security, due consideration should be given to the protection of 
individuals’ fundamental rights irrespective of their nationality.  
The joint EU – US working group that was established - and in which the WP29 is 
represented3 - may be able to shed some light on the issues at stake, notably by establishing 
the facts with regard to the disclosed intelligence programs. However, the WP29 considers it 
is its duty to also assess independently to what extent the protection provided by EU data 
protection legislation is at risk and possibly breached and what the consequences of PRISM 
and related programs may be for the privacy of our citizens’ personal data. In order to be able 
to do so we have, in addition to my previous letter dated 7 June 2013 and your letter to US 
Attorney-General Eric Holder dated 10 June 2013, identified the following issues of concern 
and questions that need to be answered as soon as possible. 
                                                 
1 http://www.theguardian.com/world/the-nsa-files 
2 Privacy, Technology and National Security: An Overview of Intelligence Collection by Robert S. Litt, ODNI 
General Counsel – Brookings Institution Washington D.C. - 19 July 2013 
3 http://www.eu2013.lt/en/news/statements/presidency-statement-on-outcome-of-discussions-on-euus-working-
group 
2 
First of all, it needs to become clear what information is actually collected through the 
intelligence programs following section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act, section 702 of the 
FISA Amendment Act, Executive Order 12333 and adjacent legislation. News reports 
indicate that both the metadata4 and contents of communications of non-US persons are 
collected, but as yet it is not fully clear which data are collected to what extent and what 
safeguards are in place before they are accessed. Neither has it become clear thus far if 
(meta)data on non-US persons collected as a by-product when investigating a US person 
under section 215 may subsequently be used for investigation of these non-US persons under 
section 702, and if so, under what legal provisions. Allegedly the collection of personal data 
takes place both on a very large scale as well as on a structural and/or systematic basis, 
allowing the NSA, FBI, CIA and/or other intelligence and law enforcement agencies 
continuous access.  
One point that has been revealed is that data may only be accessed if they originate from non-
US persons and are collected from sources within the US. The WP29 would however like to 
know when US authorities consider personal data to be inside the US, especially given the 
continuously increasing use of the internet for processing personal data, where much 
information currently is stored in the cloud, without knowing the exact location of the 
datasets, and following the global scale of backbone networks and their inherent capability to 
convey a wide range of communication services. It needs to be determined whether data on 
communication networks that are only routed through the United States (data that are in 
transit) are also subject to collection for the aforementioned intelligence programs. To this 
end, WP29 has so far considered that European law does not apply to personal data that is 
only in transit in the European Union, following article 4(1)c directive 95/46/EC. Applying 
the same reasoning would suggest that US law should not apply to data that is only in transit 
on its territory. It thus needs to become clear whether the intelligence services or other 
relevant bodies have to prove that the data are physically and legally available on US soil (i.e. 
stored on servers on US territory) or if it is sufficient that data are processed by or through an 
American company or subsidiary. Finally on this point, clarity is necessary over whether 
personal data is also collected on European territory, as is suggested in the media.5  
Next, clarification is needed about the involvement of the FISA Court, both in terms of 
procedures and the moment it is seized, as well as the conditions and criteria the Court applies 
in its decisions to allow surveillance orders of non-US persons under the US legislation 
mentioned above. The WP29 wants to be able to assess to what extent these orders are 
narrowly targeted enough and substantiated sufficiently to allow for a limitation of 
individuals’ fundamental rights on national security grounds. Additionally, it needs to be 
determined if this processing of personal data is in line with the data protection principle of 
purpose limitation and if the purposes for processing stated by the United States are indeed in 
line with the concept of national security as defined in the EU acquis. This can only be done 
in detail once the facts of the various intelligence programs are known. The US authorities 
                                                 
4 WP29 understands the American notion of metadata corresponds to the categories of data retained in the 
European Union under article 5 of the data retention directive 2002/58/EC, except for the collection of location 
data  
5 http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/07/usa-security-germany-idUSL6N0FD0FV20130707 
3 
should be encouraged to disclose several NSA request and FISA Court orders to allow for this 
assessment to take place. 
News reports suggest that the FISA Court has developed what is believed to be a secret body 
of law on surveillance and has set rules for the collection, use and access of data on the basis 
of the various intelligence programs. While it is always good if criteria limiting the processing 
of personal data are in place, it may prove problematic if these criteria are kept secret. 
Furthermore, the information that has been made public to date suggests that the FISA Court 
takes no decisions in individual cases, in which it weighs the national security interest against 
the fundamental rights of the individuals concerned, but the Court merely has to approve the 
procedures in place for the collection (and possibly use) of personal data from non-US 
persons. Moreover, the other safeguards in place do not seem to include scrutiny on the level 
of individual cases, except to ensure that the minimisation procedures (the procedures 
intended to ensure US persons are not targeted) are respected. 
A third issue at stake is the relation between the intelligence programs following section 215 
of the USA PATRIOT Act, section 702 of the FISA Amendment Act and Executive Order 
12333 on the one hand and compliance by organisations with the conditions for the third 
country transfer of personal data (including standard contractual clauses, binding corporate 
rules and the Safe Harbour Principles) on the other hand. The Safe Harbour Principles indeed 
do allow for a limitation of adherence to the Principles “to the extent necessary to meet 
national security (…) r equirements”. However, the WP29 has doubts whether the seemingly 
large-scale and structural surveillance of personal data that has now emerged can still be 
considered an exception strictly limited to the extent necessary. Furthermore, the WP29 
recalls that the Article 3.1 (b) of the Commission Decision on the Safe Harbour principles 
(Decision 2000/52/EC of 26 July 2000) gives to the competent authorities in Member States 
the possibility to suspend data flows in cases where there is a substantial likelihood that the 
Principles are being violated and where the continuing transfer would create an imminent risk 
of grave harm to data subjects. 
It also needs to be clarified if these American intelligence programs are in line with European 
and international law. This includes the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
which lays down the right to privacy in a general way. More importantly, the necessity and 
proportionality of these programs according to the Council of Europe Convention 108 needs 
to be further assessed. WP29 therefore considers it is likely that the current practice of 
apparent large-scale collection and accessing of personal data of non-US persons is not 
covered by the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention. This is particularly relevant in 
light of the on-going discussion within the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention 
Committee (T-CY) on the preparations for an additional protocol meant to facilitate trans-
border data flows in this field.6 Such a draft protocol would appear to legitimise the current 
practice of the US intelligence community by allowing access to data stored on computers 
abroad by applying the law (or the definitions of consent) of the searching party.7 
                                                 
6 (Draft) elements of an Additional Protocol to the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime regarding trans-border 
access to data, T-CY (2013)14 - version 9 April 2013 
7 WP29 understands cybercrime is very often considered to be an issue of national security by the US authorities 
4 
Consequently, individuals including those in the EU Member States would not benefit from 
the protection afforded by their domestic privacy and data protection legislation.  
Another issue that needs to be addressed is the possibility for redress for non-US persons. 
Currently, individuals affected are offered no possibility to assert their fundamental rights in 
court or before an independent oversight body. Admittedly, in general individuals will not be 
(made) aware that they are of interest to the intelligence services. However, if a suspicion 
arises, for example because an individual is wrongly arrested or limited in his freedom of 
movement, the individual needs to be able to effectively challenge the information provided 
by the intelligence services, as is the case in many European countries.  
Finally, the WP29 wishes to stress that it will not only focus its attention on the intelligence 
programs used by the United States, but will also make an effort to assess any impact of 
PRISM, including the use of PRISM-derived information on European territory, to the extent 
possible within the WP29’s mandate. Furthermore, the WP29 intends to examine compliance 
with EU data protection principles and legislation of possible similar intelligence programs on 
the territory of the Member States, such as Tempora, in its continuous endeavour to uphold 
the fundamental rights of all individuals.  
I trust the European Commission will to the best of its ability contribute in finding the 
answers to the questions raised above, both within and outside the framework of the joint EU 
- US working group.  
Yours sincerely, 
On behalf of the Article 29 Working Party, 
Jacob Kohnstamm 
Chairman 
A copy of this letter was sent to: 
- Cecilia Malmström, Commissioner for Home Affairs 
- Martin Schulz, President of the European Parliament 
- Juan Fernando López Aguilar, Chairman of the LIBE Committee of the European Parliament 
