U.
S.
?
EU
SAFE
 HARBOR
 FR
A
ME
WORK
?
GUIDE 
T
O SELF-
CER
TIFIC
A
TION 
?
M
AR
CH 2009
U.S. Department of Commerce
U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework
1401 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Room 2003
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: 202.482.5023  ?   Fax: 202.482.5522  ?   www.export.gov/safeharbor
U.S.- EU Safe Harbor Framework
A Guide to Self-Certification
Table of Contents
Introduction ...................................................... 1
Overview ......................................................... 3
Helpful Hints Guide  ............................................... 7
Safe Harbor Privacy Principles  .................................... 10
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)  ................................ 15
Appendices
Safe Harbor Application  ...................................... 37
Sample Privacy Policies ....................................... 41
Dispute Resolution Providers  ................................. 49
U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Framework ............................. 53
Certification Mark
a. Description ............................................ 54
b. Instructions for Use .................................... 54
Glossary  ..................................................... 56
  1
Introduction
Welcome to the U.S.-European Union (EU) Safe Harbor Framework: A Guide to 
Certification.  From this guide, it is our hope that U.S. companies will have a bet-
ter understanding of the process of self-certification and the resources available 
to self-certify compliance with the EU’s Directive on Data Protection.  Additional 
information may be found on our website: http://export.gov/safeharbor/
In this guide, we have provided an outline of the most critical pieces of the Safe 
Harbor Framework.  The application is made available, along with a Helpful Hints 
Guide that explains how to fill it out.  The Safe Harbor Principles and FAQs are 
also provided for easy reference.  There is also an explanation and listing of third 
party dispute resolution providers (or Independent Resource Mechanisms) with 
descriptions of the services provided by three dispute resolution providers that 
work with Safe Harbor.  Finally, we’ve also included several sample company 
privacy policies for reference, and a glossary that explains key terms.  We’ve bro-
ken this Guide into nine major sections, each to address different questions you 
might have.  What follows is a brief description of each section:
Overview: The overview gives some background on the Safe Harbor Framework, 
how it came about, and explains many of the certification requirements.  The 
overview also lists the principles of the Safe Harbor program. 
Application: The Application is provided for easy reference. Applicants should 
apply online at http://export.gov/safeharbor (click on “Certification Form” in 
the right sidebar).  
Certification Mark: The Commerce Department’s International Trade Adminis-
tration has recently developed a certification mark for the Safe Harbor Frame-
work. The mark may be used by companies on their websites to signify that 
they have self-certified compliance with the provisions of the Safe Harbor 
Framework. Instructions for use of the certification mark are provided. 
Helpful Hints Guide (to Certification): The Helpful Hints Guide is meant to 
give quick answers to any questions a U.S. company might have about the 
certification process. It should be used in conjunction with the rest of the 
Guide, however it answers many of the most common questions about the 
certification process.
Safe Harbor Principles: We have provided the full text of the official declaration 
of the Safe Harbor Principles as announced on July 21, 2000. This text is 
helpful for understanding the foundation of the Safe Harbor Principles and the 
Framework. 
2 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 3
Safe Harbor Overview
Background on the Safe Harbor 
When the European Commission’s Directive on Data Protection went into ef-
fect in October of 1998, one consequence was to prohibit the transfer of per-
sonal data to non-European Union nations that failed to meet the European 
“adequacy” standard for privacy protection. While the United States and the 
European Union share the goal of enhancing privacy protection for their citi-
zens, the United States takes a different approach to privacy than that taken 
by the European Union. To bridge these different privacy approaches and 
provide a streamlined and cost-effective means for U.S. organizations to sat-
isfy the adequacy requirement of the Directive, the U.S. Department of Com-
merce in consultation with the European Commission (EC) developed a “Safe 
Harbor” framework and a website to provide the information an organization 
would need to evaluate – and then join – the Safe Harbor. 
Approved by the EC in 2000, the Safe Harbor Framework helps protect U.S. 
companies from experiencing interruptions in their business dealings with the 
EU. Self-certifying to the Safe Harbor will assure that EU organizations know 
that your company provides “adequate” privacy protection, as defined by the  
EU Directive.
Safe Harbor Benefits
The Safe Harbor Framework provides a number of important benefits to U.S. 
and EU firms. Benefits for U.S. organizations participating in the Safe Harbor 
include:
?   All 27 Member States of the European Union will be bound by the European 
Commission’s finding of adequacy;
?   Companies participating in the Safe Harbor will be deemed adequate and 
data flows to those companies will continue;
?   Member State requirements for prior approval of data transfers either will 
be waived or approval will be automatically granted; and
?  Claims brought by European citizens against U.S. companies will be heard 
in the United States subject to limited exceptions.
The Safe Harbor Framework offers a simpler and cheaper means of complying 
with the adequacy requirements of the Directive, which should particularly 
benefit small and medium-sized enterprises.
Frequently Asked Questions: We have provided the Frequently Asked Questions 
in full text because they answer many of the most commonly asked questions 
about the Safe Harbor Framework. 
Dispute Resolution Providers: Here we have provided a short description of the 
role of dispute resolution providers (also referred to as Independent Recourse 
Mechanisms) and descriptions of the services they offer. 
Sample Privacy Policies: Here we have provided three sample privacy policies 
for reference, which may serve as guidance when creating a new Privacy 
Policy or updating an existing Privacy Policy to align it with the Safe Harbor 
Framework. The Safe Harbor Framework requires an affirmative commitment 
in the Privacy Policy to the principles of the Safe Harbor Framework.
Glossary: A short glossary is also provided for many of the technical terms 
frequently used in the Guide.
4 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 5
2. Choice
Organizations must give individuals the opportunity to choose (opt out) 
whether their personal information will be disclosed to a third party or used 
for a purpose incompatible with the purpose for which it was originally col-
lected or subsequently authorized by the individual. For sensitive informa-
tion, affirmative or explicit (opt in) choice must be given if the information is 
to be disclosed to a third party or used for a purpose other than its original 
purpose or the purpose authorized subsequently by the individual.
3. Onward Transfer (Transfers to Third Parties) 
To disclose information to a third party, organizations must apply the notice 
and choice principles. Where an organization wishes to transfer information 
to a third party that is acting as an agent, it may do so if it makes sure that 
the third party subscribes to the Safe Harbor principles or is subject to the 
Directive or another adequacy finding. As an alternative, the organization can 
enter into a written agreement with such third party requiring that the third 
party provide at least the same level of privacy protection as is required by 
the relevant principles.
4. Access
Individuals must have access to personal information about themselves that 
an organization holds and be able to correct, amend, or delete that informa-
tion where it is inaccurate, except where the burden or expense of providing 
access would be disproportionate to the risks to the individual’s privacy in 
the case in question, or where the rights of persons other than the individual 
would be violated.
5. Security
Organizations must take reasonable precautions to protect personal informa-
tion from loss, misuse and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration and de-
struction.
6. Data integrity
Personal information must be relevant for the purposes for which it is to be 
used. An organization should take reasonable steps to ensure that data is reli-
able for its intended use, accurate, complete, and current.
7. Enforcement
In order to ensure compliance with the Safe Harbor principles, there must 
be (a) readily available and affordable independent recourse mechanisms 
so that each individual’s complaints and disputes can be investigated and 
An EU organization can ensure that it is sending information to a U.S. organiza-
tion participating in the Safe Harbor by viewing the public list of Safe Harbor or-
ganizations posted on the Safe Harbor website: http://export.gov/safeharbor/ 
(click on “Safe Harbor List” in the right sidebar). This list contains the names of 
all U.S. companies that have self-certified to the Safe Harbor Framework. This 
list is updated regularly.
How does an organization join?
The decision by U.S. organizations to enter the Safe Harbor is entirely volun-
tary. Organizations that decide to participate in the Safe Harbor must comply 
with the Safe Harbor’s requirements and publicly declare that they do so. To 
be assured of Safe Harbor benefits, an organization needs to self-certify annu-
ally to the Department of Commerce in writing that it agrees to adhere to the 
Safe Harbor’s requirements, which include elements such as notice, choice, 
access, and enforcement. It must also state in its published privacy policy 
statement that it adheres to the Safe Harbor. The Department of Commerce 
will maintain a list of all organizations that file self-certification letters and 
make both the list and the self-certification letters publicly available.
To qualify for the Safe Harbor, an organization can (1) join a self-regulatory pri-
vacy program that adheres to the Safe Harbor’s requirements; or (2) develop its 
own self-regulatory privacy policy that conforms to the Safe Harbor. Further, 
the organization must be subject to the jurisdiction either of the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) or, with respect to air carriers and ticket agents, the Depart-
ment of Transportation (DOT). The FTC and DOT have authority to take enforce-
ment action against organizations that state they are in compliance with the 
Safe Harbor framework but then fail to live up to their statements. Organiza-
tions currently ineligible for Safe Harbor include financial institutions, including 
banks, investment houses, credit unions, savings & loan institutions, non-profit 
organizations, insurances companies and meat processing facilities.
What do the Safe Harbor principles require?
Organizations must comply with the seven Safe Harbor principles. The prin-
ciples require the following:
1. Notice
Organizations must notify individuals about the purposes for which they col-
lect and use information about them. They must provide information about 
how individuals can contact the organization with any inquiries or complaints, 
the types of third parties to which they disclose the information and the 
choices and means the organization offers for limiting its use and disclosure. 
6 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 7
Helpful Hints Guide
This section contains a succinct guide to assist you with the self-certification 
process for Safe Harbor. It functions as a checklist of questions and a to-do 
list to help determine your firm’s readiness to begin the certification process. 
Topics include considering whether your firm falls under the jurisdiction of the 
U.S. Federal Trade Commission or Department of Transportation; developing 
a Safe Harbor compliant privacy policy statement; establishing your organiza-
tion’s independent recourse mechanism, and ensuring it is in place; and des-
ignating a contact point within your organization regarding Safe Harbor. This 
section should be used in conjunction with the rest of the Guide, and the re-
quirements for self-certification detailed in #6, of the FAQs; however it answers 
many common questions surrounding the certification process.
Helpful Hints Prior to Self-Certifying to the Safe Harbor
1.  Confirm That Your Organization is subject to the Jurisdiction of Either the U.S. 
Federal Trade Commission of the U.S. Department of  Transportation: 
Any U.S. organization that is subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) or U.S. air carriers and ticket agents subject to the juris-
diction of the Department of Transportation (DoT) may participate in the 
Safe Harbor. The FTC and DoT have both stated in letters to the European 
Commission (located under http://export.gov/safeharbor/SH_Documents.
asp Letters G & H) that they can take enforcement action against organiza-
tions that state that they are in compliance with the Safe Harbor, but then 
fail to live up to their statements. If you are uncertain as to whether your 
organization falls under the jurisdiction of either the FTC or DoT, be sure to 
contact those agencies for more information. 
2.  Develop a Safe Harbor Compliant Privacy Policy Statement: 
Remember to develop a Safe Harbor compliant privacy policy statement be-
fore submitting a self-certification form to the Department of Commerce.
?   Make Sure That Your Privacy Policy Statement Conforms to the Safe Harbor 
Principles: In order for a privacy policy to be compliant with the Safe 
Harbor, the privacy policy statement must conform to the seven Privacy 
Principles and any relevant points that are covered in the Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQs) - located in Appendix C or online at: http://export.gov/
safeharbor/SH_Documents.asp. In addition, the privacy policy statement 
should reflect your actual and anticipated information handling practices. 
It is also important to write a policy that is clear, concise and easy to 
understand.
resolved and damages awarded where the applicable law or private sector 
initiatives so provide; (b) procedures for verifying that the commitments com-
panies make to adhere to the Safe Harbor principles have been implement-
ed; and (c) obligations to remedy problems arising out of a failure to comply 
with the principles. Sanctions must be sufficiently rigorous to ensure compli-
ance by the organization. Organizations that fail to provide annual self-certifica-
tion letters will no longer appear in the list of participants and Safe-Harbor  
benefits will no longer be assured.
To provide further guidance, the Department of Commerce has issued a set of 
frequently asked questions and answers (FAQs) that clarify and supplement 
the Safe Harbor principles which can be found in Appendix C or online at: 
http://export.gov/safeharbor/SH_Documents.asp
For an overview, please visit:
http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/SH_Overview.asp
8 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 9
Council for International Business (c/o Mr. Paul Cronin, U.S. Council for 
International Business (USCIB); 1212 Avenue of the Americas; New York, NY 
10036), which has agreed to act as trusted third party for this purpose.
? Please see FAQ 5 for more details regarding the role of the Data Protection 
Authorities. Should you need further information on how to carry out the 
payment, please contact Mr. Paul Cronin, USCIB, at 212-703-5088, or pcronin@
uscib.org. If, on the other hand, you require more information on how the 
cooperation/compliance with the EU DPAs works, you should contact the 
Secretariat of the Data Protection Panel at ec-dppanel-secr@cec.eu.int.
4.  Ensure That Your Organization’s Verification Mechanism is in Place: As discussed 
in FAQ 7, organizations self-certifying to Safe Harbor are required to have 
procedures in place for verifying compliance. To meet this requirement, 
an organization may use a self-assessment or an outside/third-party 
assessment program. For additional guidance on the Safe Harbor’s 
verification requirement, please see FAQ 7.
5.  Designate a Contact Point Within Your Organization Regarding Safe Harbor: 
Each organization is required to provide a contact point for the handling of 
questions, complaints, access requests, and any other issues arising under 
the Safe Harbor. This contact point can be either the corporate officer that 
is certifying the company’s adherence to Safe Harbor, or another official 
within the organization, such as a Chief Privacy Officer. 
The following is the official declaration of the Safe Harbor Principles as an-
nounced on July 21, 2000. 
The Safe Harbor was founded on seven principles designed to ensure ef-
fective privacy protections in a framework that functions both in the 
European and U.S. privacy contexts. These seven principles include notice; 
choice; onward transfers to third parties; security; data integrity; access; 
and enforcement.
?   Make Specific Reference to Your Organization’s Safe Harbor Adherence in the 
Text of Your Organization’s Privacy Policy: FAQ 6 requires all organizations 
that self-certify to state in their relevant published privacy policy 
statements that they adhere to the Safe Harbor Principles (Appendix B).
?   Provide an Accurate Privacy Policy Statement Location and Make Sure that 
Your Privacy Policy Statement is Available to the Public: 
At the time of self-certification, all organizations must provide an accurate 
and publicly available location for their applicable privacy statement. If your 
organization decides to post its privacy policy statement on an Internet or In-
tranet site, it must provide an accurate link to the statement on the organiza-
tion’s Safe Harbor self-certification form. In addition, the organization should 
verify that its privacy policy statement is effective prior to self-certification.
3.  Establish Your Organization’s Independent Recourse Mechanism: Under the 
Safe Harbor’s Enforcement Principle, organizations self-certifying to Safe 
Harbor must establish an independent recourse mechanism available 
to investigate unresolved  complaints. (See FAQ 11 for more information 
regarding dispute resolution under Safe Harbor.) The organization must 
ensure that its recourse mechanism is in place prior to self-certification. 
? In most cases, organizations self-certifying to Safe Harbor may choose 
to utilize private sector dispute resolution programs. While programs 
vary, organizations like BBB OnLine, TRUSTe, AICPA WebTrust, the Direct 
Marketing Association, the Entertainment Software Rating Board, JAMS and 
the American Arbitration Association have developed programs that assist 
in compliance with the Safe Harbor’s enforcement principle and FAQ 11.
? Alternatively, organizations may choose to cooperate and comply 
with the European Data Protection Authorities (DPAs). In doing so, the 
organization must follow the procedures outlined in FAQ 5. If human 
resources data is being covered in the organization’s self-certification, 
the organization must agree to cooperate and comply with the DPAs for 
purposes of handling unresolved complaints. Additional guidance for 
the handling of human resources data under the Safe Harbor is provided 
in FAQ 9.
? Please note that organizations who choose to utilize the European Data 
Protection Authorities for dispute resolution will be required to pay 
an annual fee of US $50 in order to cover the operating costs of the Data 
Protection Authorities’ panel. This fee is payable to the United States 
10 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 11
part on self-regulation, its failure to comply with such self-regulation must also 
be actionable under Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act prohibiting 
unfair and deceptive acts or another law or regulation prohibiting such acts. 
(See the annex for the list of U.S. statutory bodies recognized by the EU.) In addition, 
organizations subject to a statutory, regulatory, administrative or other body 
of law (or of rules) that effectively protects personal privacy may also qualify 
for Safe Harbor benefits. In all instances, Safe Harbor benefits are assured from 
the date on which each organization wishing to qualify for the Safe Harbor self-
certifies to the Department of Commerce (or its designee) its adherence to the 
Principles in accordance with the guidance set forth in the Frequently Asked 
Question on Self-Certification. 
Adherence to these Principles may be limited: (a) to the extent necessary to 
meet national security, public interest, or law enforcement requirements; (b) by 
statute, government regulation, or case law that create conflicting obligations 
or explicit authorizations, provided that, in exercising any such authorization, 
an organization can demonstrate that its non-compliance with the Principles 
is limited to the extent necessary to meet the overriding legitimate interests 
furthered by such authorization; or (c) if the effect of the Directive or Member 
State law is to allow exceptions or derogations, provided such exceptions or 
derogations are applied in comparable contexts. Consistent with the goal of 
enhancing privacy protection, organizations should strive to implement these 
Principles fully and transparently, including indicating in their privacy policies 
where exceptions to the Principles permitted by (b) above will apply on a regu-
lar basis. For the same reason, where the option is allowable under the Princi-
ples and/or U.S. law, organizations are expected to opt for the higher protection  
where possible. 
Organizations may wish for practical or other reasons to apply the Principles to 
all their data processing operations, but they are only obligated to apply them to 
data transferred after they enter the Safe Harbor. To qualify for the Safe Harbor, 
organizations are not obligated to apply these Principles to personal information 
in manually processed filing systems. Organizations wishing to benefit from the 
Safe Harbor for receiving information in manually processed filing systems from 
the EU must apply the Principles to any such information transferred after they 
enter the Safe Harbor. An organization that wishes to extend Safe Harbor benefits 
to human resources personal information transferred from the EU for use in the 
context of an employment relationship must indicate this when it self-certifies to 
the Department of Commerce (or its designee) and conform to the requirements 
Safe Harbor Privacy Principles
Safe Harbor Privacy Principles 
Issued by the U.S. Department of Commerce on July 21, 2000
The European Union’s comprehensive privacy legislation, the Directive on 
Data Protection (the Directive), became effective on October 25, 1998. It re-
quires that transfers of personal data take place only to non-EU countries that 
provide an “adequate” level of privacy protection. While the United States and 
the European Union share the goal of enhancing privacy protection for their 
citizens, the United States takes a different approach to privacy from that tak-
en by the European Union. The United States uses a sectoral approach that 
relies on a mix of legislation, regulation, and self-regulation. Given those dif-
ferences, many U.S. organizations have expressed uncertainty about the im-
pact of the EU-required “adequacy standard” on personal data transfers from 
the European Union to the United States. 
To diminish this uncertainty and provide a more predictable framework for 
such data transfers, the Department of Commerce is issuing this document 
and Frequently Asked Questions (“the Principles”) under its statutory author-
ity to foster, promote, and develop international commerce. The Principles 
were developed in consultation with industry and the general public to fa-
cilitate trade and commerce between the United States and European Union. 
They are intended for use solely by U.S. organizations receiving personal data 
from the European Union for the purpose of qualifying for the Safe Harbor 
and the presumption of “adequacy” it creates. Because the Principles were 
solely designed to serve this specific purpose, their adoption for other pur-
poses may be inappropriate. The Principles cannot be used as a substitute for 
national provisions implementing the Directive that apply to the processing 
of personal data in the Member States. 
Decisions by organizations to qualify for the Safe Harbor are entirely vol-
untary, and organizations may qualify for the Safe Harbor in different ways. 
Organizations that decide to adhere to the Principles must comply with the 
Principles in order to obtain and retain the benefits of the Safe Harbor and 
publicly declare that they do so. For example, if an organization joins a self-
regulatory privacy program that adheres to the Principles, it qualifies for the 
Safe Harbor. Organizations may also qualify by developing their own self-
regulatory privacy policies provided that they conform with the Principles. 
Where in complying with the Principles, an organization relies in whole or in 
12 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 13
by the individual through the exercise of opt in choice. In any case, an orga-
nization should treat as sensitive any information received from a third party 
where the third party treats and identifies it as sensitive. 
Onward Transfer: To disclose information to a third party,organizations must 
apply the Notice and Choice Principles. Where an organization wishes to trans-
fer information to a third party that is acting as an agent, as described in the 
endnote, it may do so if it first either ascertains that the third party subscribes 
to the Principles or is subject to the Directive or another adequacy finding or 
enters into a written agreement with such third party requiring that the third 
party provide at least the same level of privacy protection as is required by 
the relevant Principles. If the organization complies with these requirements, 
it shall not be held responsible (unless the organization agrees otherwise) 
when a third party to which it transfers such information processes it in a way 
contrary to any restrictions or representations, unless the organization knew 
or should have known the third party would process it in such a contrary way 
and the organization has not taken reasonable steps to prevent or stop such 
processing. 
Security: Organizations creating, maintaining, using or disseminating per-
sonal information must take reasonable precautions to protect it from loss, 
misuse and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration and destruction. 
Data Integrity: Consistent with the Principles, personal information must be 
relevant for the purposes for which it is to be used. An organization may not 
process personal information in a way that is incompatible with the purposes 
for which it has been collected or subsequently authorized by the individual. 
To the extent necessary for those purposes, an organization should take rea-
sonable steps to ensure that data is reliable for its intended use, accurate, 
complete, and current. 
Access: Individuals must have access to personal information about them that 
an organization holds and be able to correct, amend, or delete that informa-
tion where it is inaccurate, except where the burden or expense of providing 
access would be disproportionate to the risks to the individual’s privacy in 
the case in question, or where the rights of persons other than the individual 
would be violated. 
Enforcement: Effective privacy protection must include mechanisms for assur-
ing compliance with the Principles, recourse for individuals to whom the data 
relate affected by non-compliance with the Principles, and consequences for 
the organization when the Principles are not followed. At a minimum, such 
set forth in the Frequently Asked Question on Self-Certification. Organizations 
will also be able to provide the safeguards necessary under Article 26 of the 
Directive if they include the Principles in written agreements with parties trans-
ferring data from the EU for the substantive privacy provisions, once the other 
provisions for such model contracts are authorized by the Commission and the 
Member States. 
U.S. law will apply to questions of interpretation and compliance with the 
Safe Harbor Principles (including the Frequently Asked Questions) and rel-
evant privacy policies by Safe Harbor organizations, except where organiza-
tions have committed to cooperate with European Data Protection Authori-
ties. Unless otherwise stated, all provisions of the Safe Harbor Principles and 
Frequently Asked Questions apply where they are relevant. 
“Personal data” and “personal information” are data about an identified or 
identifiable individual that are within the scope of the Directive, received by a 
U.S. organization from the European Union, and recorded in any form. 
Notice: An organization must inform individuals about the purposes for which 
it collects and uses information about them, how to contact the organization 
with any inquiries or complaints, the types of third parties to which it discloses 
the information, and the choices and means the organization offers individuals 
for limiting its use and disclosure. This notice must be provided in clear and 
conspicuous language when individuals are first asked to provide personal 
information to the organization or as soon thereafter as is practicable, but in 
any event before the organization uses such information for a purpose other 
than that for which it was originally collected or processed by the transferring 
organization or discloses it for the first time to a third party(1). 
Choice: An organization must offer individuals the opportunity to choose (opt 
out) whether their personal information is (a) to be disclosed to a third party(1) 
or (b) to be used for a purpose that is incompatible with the purpose(s) for 
which it was originally collected or subsequently authorized by the individu-
al. Individuals must be provided with clear and conspicuous, readily available, 
and affordable mechanisms to exercise choice. 
For sensitive information (i.e. personal information specifying medical or 
health conditions, racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philo-
sophical beliefs, trade union membership or information specifying the sex 
life of the individual), they must be given affirmative or explicit (opt in) choice 
if the information is to be disclosed to a third party or used for a purpose oth-
er than those for which it was originally collected or subsequently authorized 
14 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 15
Safe Harbor Framework
The following section contains frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding 
the Safe Harbor Framework. Divided into fifteen (15) sections, these represent 
the most commonly asked questions covering the rights of data subjects; ob-
ligations and interactions between data subjects, handlers and third parties; 
and topics including the certification process, liabilities and enforcement, 
sector-specific rules and exceptions, and potential “what ifs” in the Safe Har-
bor context.
Safe Harbor Framework Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
 I.  Sensitive Data  ...............................................16
 II. Journalistic Exceptions  .......................................16
 III.  Secondary Liability ...........................................16
 IV.  Investment Banking and Audits  ..............................17
 V.  The Role of the Data Protection Authorities  ...................17
 VI.  Self-Certification  .............................................19
 VII.  Verification  ..................................................21
 VII.  Access  ......................................................22
 IX.  Human Resources  ...........................................27
 X.  Article 17 contracts  ..........................................29
 XI.  Dispute Resolution and Enforcement  .........................30
 XII.  Choice - Timing of Opt-Out  ...................................32
 XIII.  Travel Information  ...........................................33
XIV. Pharmaceutical and Medical Products  ........................34
 XV.  Public Record and Publicly Available Information  .............36
mechanisms must include (a) readily available and affordable independent 
recourse mechanisms by which each individual’s complaints and disputes are 
investigated and resolved by reference to the Principles and damages award-
ed where the applicable law or private sector initiatives so provide; (b) follow 
up procedures for verifying that the attestations and assertions businesses 
make about their privacy practices are true and that privacy practices have 
been implemented as presented; and (c) obligations to remedy problems aris-
ing out of failure to comply with the Principles by organizations announcing 
their adherence to them and consequences for such organizations. Sanctions 
must be sufficiently rigorous to ensure compliance by organizations. 
1.  It is not necessary to provide notice or choice when disclosure is made to 
a third party that is acting as an agent to perform task(s) on behalf of and 
under the instructions of the organization. The Onward Transfer Principle, 
on the other hand, does apply to such disclosures.
16 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 17
IV. Investment banking and audits 
Q:  The activities of auditors and investment bankers may involve processing per-
sonal data without the consent or knowledge of the individual. Under what 
circumstances is this permitted by the Notice, Choice, and Access Principles? 
A:  Investment bankers or auditors may process information without knowledge 
of the individual only to the extent and for the period necessary to meet statu-
tory or public interest requirements and in other circumstances in which the 
application of these Principles would prejudice the legitimate interests of the 
organization. These legitimate interests include the monitoring of companies’ 
compliance with their legal obligations and legitimate accounting activities, 
and the need for confidentiality connected with possible acquisitions, merg-
ers, joint ventures, or other similar transactions carried out by investment 
bankers or auditors. 
V.  The Role of the Data Protection Authorities 
Q:  How will companies that commit to cooperate with European Union Data Pro-
tection Authorities (DPAs) make those commitments and how will they be imple-
mented? 
A:  Under the Safe Harbor, U.S. organizations receiving personal data from the EU 
must commit to employ effective mechanisms for assuring compliance with 
the Safe Harbor Principles. More specifically as set out in the Enforcement Prin-
ciple, they must provide (a) recourse for individuals to whom the data relate, 
(b) follow up procedures for verifying that the attestations and assertions they 
have made about their privacy practices are true, and (c) obligations to rem-
edy problems arising out of failure to comply with the Principles and conse-
quences for such organizations. An organization may satisfy points (a) and (c) 
of the Enforcement Principle if it adheres to the requirements of this FAQ for 
cooperating with the DPAs. 
An organization may commit to cooperate with the DPAs by declaring in 
its Safe Harbor certification to the Department of Commerce (see FAQ 6 on 
self-certification) that the organization: 
1.  Elects to satisfy the requirement in points (a) and (c) of the Safe Harbor 
Enforcement Principle by committing to cooperate with the DPAs; 
2.  Will cooperate with the DPAs in the investigation and resolution of com-
plaints brought under the Safe Harbor; and 
3.  Will comply with any advice given by the DPAs where the DPAs take the 
view that the organization needs to take specific action to comply with 
I. Sensitive Data 
Q:  Must an organization always provide explicit (opt in) choice with respect to 
sensitive data? 
A:  No, such choice is not required where the processing is: (1) in the vital inter-
ests of the data subject or another person; (2) necessary for the establish-
ment of legal claims or defenses; (3) required to provide medical care or di-
agnosis; (4) carried out in the course of legitimate activities by a foundation, 
association or any other non-profit body with a political, philosophical, reli-
gious or trade-union aim and on condition that the processing relates solely 
to the members of the body or to the persons who have regular contact 
with it in connection with its purposes and that the data are not disclosed 
to a third party without the consent of the data subjects; (5) necessary to 
carry out the organization’s obligations in the field of employment law; or 
(6) related to data that are manifestly made public by the individual.
II.  Journalistic Exceptions 
Q:  Given U.S. constitutional protections for freedom of the press and the Direc-
tive’s exemption for journalistic material, do the Safe Harbor Principles apply 
to personal information gathered, maintained, or disseminated for journalis-
tic purposes? 
A:  Where the rights of a free press embodied in the First Amendment of the 
U. S. Constitution intersect with privacy protection interests, the First 
Amendment must govern the balancing of these interests with regard to 
the activities of U.S. persons or organizations. Personal information that is 
gathered for publication, broadcast, or other forms of public communica-
tion of journalistic material, whether used or not, as well as information 
found in previously published material disseminated from media archives, 
is not subject to the requirements of the Safe Harbor Principles. 
III. Secondary Liability 
Q:  Are Internet service providers (ISPs), telecommunications carriers, or other organi-
zations liable under the Safe Harbor Principles when on behalf of another organi-
zation they merely transmit, route, switch or cache information that may violate 
their terms? 
A:  No. As is the case with the Directive itself, the Safe Harbor does not create sec-
ondary liability. To the extent that an organization is acting as a mere conduit 
for data transmitted by third parties and does not determine the purposes 
and means of processing those personal data, it would not be liable. 
18 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 19
U.S. federal or state body with statutory powers to take enforcement action in 
cases of deception or misrepresentation, or to conclude that the agreement 
to cooperate has been seriously breached and must therefore be considered 
null and void. In the latter case, the panel will inform the Department of Com-
merce (or its designee) so that the list of Safe Harbor participants can be duly 
amended. Any failure to fulfill the undertaking to cooperate with the DPAs, as 
well as failures to comply with the Safe Harbor Principles, will be actionable as 
a deceptive practice under Section 5 of the FTC Act or other similar statute. 
Organizations choosing this option will be required to pay an annual fee 
which will be designed to cover the operating costs of the panel, and they 
may additionally be asked to meet any necessary translation expenses arising 
out of the panel’s consideration of referrals or complaints against them. The 
annual fee will not exceed $500 and will be less for smaller companies. 
The option of co-operating with the DPAs will be available to organizations 
joining the Safe Harbor during a three-year period. The DPAs will reconsider 
this arrangement before the end of that period if the number of U.S. organiza-
tions choosing this option proves to be excessive. 
VI. Self-Certification 
Q:   How does an organization self-certify that it adheres to the Safe Harbor Prin-
ciples? 
A:   Safe Harbor benefits are assured from the date on which an organization 
self-certifies to the Department of Commerce (or its designee) its adher-
ence to the Principles in accordance with the guidance set forth below. 
To self-certify for the Safe Harbor, organizations can provide to the Depart-
ment of Commerce (or its designee) a letter, signed by a corporate officer 
on behalf of the organization that is joining the Safe Harbor, that contains 
at least the following information: 
1.  name of organization, mailing address, email address, telephone and fax 
numbers; 
2.  description of the activities of the organization with respect to personal 
information received from the EU; and description of the organization’s 
privacy policy for such personal information, including: 
 a. where the privacy policy is available for viewing by the public, 
 b. its effective date of implementation, 
 c.  a contact office for the handling of complaints, access requests, and 
any other issues arising under the Safe Harbor, 
the Safe Harbor Principles, including remedial or compensatory mea-
sures for the benefit of individuals affected by any non-compliance with 
the Principles, and will provide the DPAs with written confirmation that 
such action has been taken. 
The cooperation of the DPAs will be provided in the form of information 
and advice in the following way: 
?    The advice of the DPAs will be delivered through an informal panel of 
DPAs established at the European Union level, which will inter alia help 
ensure a harmonised and coherent approach.
?    The panel will provide advice to the U.S. organizations concerned on un-
resolved complaints from individuals about the handling of personal in-
formation that has been transferred from the EU under the Safe Harbor. 
This advice will be designed to ensure that the Safe Harbor Principles are 
being correctly applied and will include any remedies for the individual(s) 
concerned that the DPAs consider appropriate.
?    The panel will provide such advice in response to referrals from the or-
ganizations concerned and/or to complaints received directly from indi-
viduals against organizations which have committed to cooperate with 
DPAs for Safe Harbor purposes, while encouraging and if necessary help-
ing such individuals in the first instance to use the in-house complaint 
handling arrangements that the organization may offer.
?    Advice will be issued only after both sides in a dispute have had a reason-
able opportunity to comment and to provide any evidence they wish. 
The panel will seek to deliver advice as quickly as this requirement for 
due process allows. As a general rule, the panel will aim to provide advice 
within 60 days after receiving a complaint or referral and more quickly 
where possible.
?    The panel will make public the results of its consideration of complaints 
submitted to it, if it sees fit.
?    The delivery of advice through the panel will not give rise to any liability 
for the panel or for individual DPAs.
As noted above, organizations choosing this option for dispute resolution 
must undertake to comply with the advice of the DPAs. If an organization 
fails to comply within 25 days of the delivery of the advice and has offered no 
satisfactory explanation for the delay, the panel will give notice of its inten-
tion either to submit the matter to the Federal Trade Commission or other 
20 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 21
the takeover or merger or (2) elect to self-certify its adherence to the Safe Har-
bor Principles or put in place other safeguards, such as a written agreement 
that will ensure adherence to the Safe Harbor Principles. Where neither (1) nor 
(2) applies, any data that has been acquired under the Safe Harbor must be 
promptly deleted. 
An organization does not need to subject all personal information to the Safe 
Harbor Principles, but it must subject to the Safe Harbor Principles all per-
sonal data received from the EU after it joins the Safe Harbor. 
Any misrepresentation to the general public concerning an organization’s ad-
herence to the Safe Harbor Principles may be actionable by the Federal Trade 
Commission or other relevant government body. Misrepresentations to the 
Department of Commerce (or its designee) may be actionable under the False 
Statements Act (18 U.S.C. § 1001).
*See FAQ 7 on verification 
VII. Verification 
Q:   How do organizations provide follow up procedures for verifying that the at-
testations and assertions they make about their Safe Harbor privacy practices 
are true and those privacy practices have been implemented as represented 
and in accordance with the Safe Harbor Principles? 
A:  To meet the verification requirements of the Enforcement Principle, an 
organization may verify such attestations and assertions either through 
self-assessment or outside compliance reviews. 
Under the self-assessment approach, such verification would have to in-
dicate that an organization’s published privacy policy regarding personal 
information received from the EU is accurate, comprehensive, prominent-
ly displayed, completely implemented and accessible. It would also need 
to indicate that its privacy policy conforms to the Safe Harbor Principles; 
that individuals are informed of any in-house arrangements for handling 
complaints and of the independent mechanisms through which they may 
pursue complaints; that it has in place procedures for training employees 
in its implementation, and disciplining them for failure to follow it; and 
that it has in place internal procedures for periodically conducting objec-
tive reviews of compliance with the above. A statement verifying the self- 
assessment should be signed by a corporate officer or other authorized 
representative of the organization at least once a year and made available 
upon request by individuals or in the context of an investigation or a com-
plaint about non-compliance. 
 d.  the specific statutory body that has jurisdiction to hear any claims 
against the organization regarding possible unfair or deceptive prac-
tices and violations of laws or regulations governing privacy (and that 
is listed in the annex to the Principles),
 e.  name of any privacy programs in which the organization is a member, 
 f. method of verification (e.g. in-house, third party)*, and 
 g.  the independent recourse mechanism that is available to investigate 
unresolved complaints. 
Where the organization wishes its Safe Harbor benefits to cover human re-
sources information transferred from the EU for use in the context of the 
employment relationship, it may do so where there is a statutory body with 
jurisdiction to hear claims against the organization arising out of human re-
sources information that is listed in the annex to the Principles. In addition 
the organization must indicate this in its letter and declare its commitment to 
cooperate with the EU authority or authorities concerned in conformity with 
FAQ 9 and FAQ 5 as applicable and that it will comply with the advice given by  
such authorities. 
The Department (or its designee) will maintain a list of all organizations that 
file such letters, thereby assuring the availability of Safe Harbor benefits, and 
will update such list on the basis of annual letters and notifications received 
pursuant to FAQ 11. Such self-certification letters should be provided not less 
than annually. Otherwise the organization will be removed from the list and 
Safe Harbor benefits will no longer be assured. Both the list and the self-certi-
fication letters submitted by the organizations will be made publicly available. 
All organizations that self-certify for the Safe Harbor must also state in their 
relevant published privacy policy statements that they adhere to the Safe  
Harbor Principles. 
The undertaking to adhere to the Safe Harbor Principles is not time-limited in 
respect of data received during the period in which the organization enjoys 
the benefits of the Safe Harbor. Its undertaking means that it will continue to 
apply the Principles to such data for as long as the organization stores, uses or 
discloses them, even if it subsequently leaves the Safe Harbor for any reason. 
An organization that will cease to exist as a separate legal entity as a result 
of a merger or a takeover must notify the Department of Commerce (or its 
designee) of this in advance. The notification should also indicate whether 
the acquiring entity or the entity resulting from the merger will (1) continue 
to be bound by the Safe Harbor Principles by the operation of law governing 
22 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 23
Rather, experience has shown that in responding to individuals’ access re-
quests, organizations should first be guided by the concern(s) that led to 
the requests in the first place. For example, if an access request is vague or 
broad in scope, an organization may engage the individual in a dialogue so 
as to better understand the motivation for the request and to locate respon-
sive information. The organization might inquire about which part(s) of the 
organization the individual interacted with and/or about the nature of the 
information (or its use) that is the subject of the access request. Individuals 
do not, however, have to justify requests for access to their own data. 
Expense and burden are important factors and should be taken into ac-
count but they are not controlling in determining whether providing ac-
cess is reasonable. For example, if the information is used for decisions that 
will significantly affect the individual (e.g., the denial or grant of important 
benefits, such as insurance, a mortgage, or a job), then consistent with the 
other provisions of these FAQs, the organization would have to disclose 
that information even if it is relatively difficult or expensive to provide. 
If the information requested is not sensitive or not used for decisions that 
will significantly affect the individual (e.g., non-sensitive marketing data 
that is used to determine whether or not to send the individual a catalog), 
but is readily available and inexpensive to provide, an organization would 
have to provide access to factual information that the organization stores 
about the individual. The information concerned could include facts ob-
tained from the individual, facts gathered in the course of a transaction, 
or facts obtained from others that pertain to the individual. 
Consistent with the fundamental nature of access, organizations should 
always make good faith efforts to provide access. For example, where cer-
tain information needs to be protected and can be readily separated from 
other information subject to an access request, the organization should 
redact the protected information and make available the other informa-
tion. If an organization determines that access should be denied in any 
particular instance, it should provide the individual requesting access with 
an explanation of why it has made that determination and a contact point 
for any further inquiries. 
2. Q:  What is confidential commercial information and may organizations deny 
access in order to safeguard it? 
A:  Confidential commercial information (as that term is used in the Fed-
eral Rules of Civil Procedure on discovery) is information which an 
Organizations should retain their records on the implementation of their 
Safe Harbor privacy practices and make them available upon request in 
the context of an investigation or a complaint about non-compliance to 
the independent body responsible for investigating complaints or to the 
agency with unfair and deceptive practices jurisdiction. 
Where the organization has chosen outside compliance review, such a 
review needs to demonstrate that its privacy policy regarding personal 
information received from the EU conforms to the Safe Harbor Principles, 
that it is being complied with and that individuals are informed of the 
mechanisms through which they may pursue complaints. The methods 
of review may include without limitation auditing, random reviews, use 
of “decoys,” or use of technology tools as appropriate. A statement verify-
ing that an outside compliance review has been successfully completed 
should be signed either by the reviewer or by the corporate officer or 
other authorized representative of the organization at least once a year 
and made available upon request by individuals or in the context of an 
investigation or a complaint about compliance. 
VIII. Access 
Access Principle: 
Individuals must have access to personal information about them that an orga-
nization holds and be able to correct, amend or delete that information where 
it is inaccurate, except where the burden or expense of providing access would 
be disproportionate to the risks to the individual’s privacy in the case in ques-
tion, or where the legitimate rights of persons other than the individual would 
be violated. 
1. Q: Is the right of access absolute? 
A:  No. Under the Safe Harbor Principles, the right of access is fundamental 
to privacy protection. In particular, it allows individuals to verify the ac-
curacy of information held about them. Nonetheless, the obligation of 
an organization to provide access to the personal information it holds 
about an individual is subject to the principle of proportionality or rea-
sonableness and has to be tempered in certain instances. Indeed, the 
Explanatory Memorandum to the 1980 OECD Privacy Guidelines makes 
clear that an organization’s access obligation is not absolute. It does not 
require the exceedingly thorough search mandated, for example, by a 
subpoena, nor does it require access to all the different forms in which 
the information may be maintained by the organization. 
24 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 25
a.  interference with execution or enforcement of the law, including the pre-
vention, investigation or detection of offenses or the right to a fair trial; 
b.  interference with private causes of action, including the prevention, 
investigation or detection of legal claims or the right to a fair trial; 
c.   disclosure of personal information pertaining to other individual(s) 
where such references cannot be redacted; 
d.  breaching a legal or other professional privilege or obligation; 
e.  breaching the necessary confidentiality of future or ongoing negotia-
tions, such as those involving the acquisition of publicly quoted com-
panies; 
f.  prejudicing employee security investigations or grievance proceed-
ings; 
g.  prejudicing the confidentiality that may be necessary for limited peri-
ods in connection with employee succession planning and corporate 
re-organizations; or 
h.  prejudicing the confidentiality that may be necessary in connection 
with monitoring, inspection or regulatory functions connected with 
sound economic or financial management; or 
i.   other circumstances in which the burden or cost of providing access 
would be disproportionate or the legitimate rights or interests of oth-
ers would be violated. 
An organization which claims an exception has the burden of demonstrat-
ing its applicability (as is normally the case). As noted above, the reasons for 
denying or limiting access and a contact point for further inquires should 
be given to individuals. 
6. Q: Can an organization charge a fee to cover the cost of providing access? 
A:   Yes. The OECD Guidelines recognize that organizations may charge a 
fee, provided that it is not excessive. Thus organizations may charge a 
reasonable fee for access. Charging a fee may be useful in discouraging 
repetitive and vexatious requests. 
Organizations that are in the business of selling publicly available infor-
mation may thus charge the organization’s customary fee in responding 
to requests for access. Individuals may alternatively seek access to their 
information from the organization that originally compiled the data. 
organization has taken steps to protect from disclosure, where disclo-
sure would help a competitor in the market. The particular computer 
program an organization uses, such as a modeling program, or the de-
tails of that program may be confidential commercial information. Where 
confidential commercial information can be readily separated from 
other information subject to an access request, the organization should 
redact the confidential commercial information and make available the 
non-confidential information. Organizations may deny or limit access to 
the extent that granting it would reveal its own confidential commercial 
information as defined above, such as marketing inferences or classifica-
tions generated by the organization, or the confidential commercial in-
formation of another where such information is subject to a contractual 
obligation of confidentiality in circumstances where such an obligation 
of confidentiality would normally be undertaken or imposed. 
3. Q:  In providing access, may an organization disclose to individuals personal in-
formation about them derived from its data bases or is access to the data 
base itself required? 
A:  Access can be provided in the form of disclosure by an organization to 
the individual and does not require access by the individual to an orga-
nization’s data base. 
4.  Q:   Does an organization have to restructure its data bases to be able to provide 
access? 
A:   Access needs to be provided only to the extent that an organization 
stores the information. The access principle does not itself create any 
obligation to retain, maintain, reorganize, or restructure personal infor-
mation files. 
5. Q:  These replies make clear that access may be denied in certain circumstances. 
In what other circumstances may an organization deny individuals access 
to their  personal information? 
A:  Such circumstances are limited, and any reasons for denying access must 
be specific. An organization can refuse to provide access to information to 
the extent that disclosure is likely to interfere with the safeguarding of im-
portant countervailing public interests, such as national security; defense; 
or public security. In addition, where personal information is processed 
solely for research or statistical purposes, access may be denied. Other rea-
sons for denying or limiting access are:
26 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 27
11. Q: Is there a time within which responses must be provided to access requests? 
A:  Yes, organizations should respond without excessive delay and within 
a reasonable time period. This requirement may be satisfied in differ-
ent ways as the explanatory memorandum to the 1980 OECD Privacy 
Guidelines states. For example, a data controller who provides informa-
tion to data subjects at regular intervals may be exempted from obliga-
tions to respond at once to individual requests. 
IX. Human Resources 
1. Q.  Is the transfer from the EU to the United States of personal information collect-
ed in the context of the employment relationship covered by the Safe Harbor?
A:  Yes, where a company in the EU transfers personal information about its 
employees (past or present) collected in the context of the employment re-
lationship, to a parent, affiliate, or unaffiliated service provider in the United 
States participating in the Safe Harbor, the transfer enjoys the benefits of 
the Safe Harbor. In such cases, the collection of the information and its pro-
cessing prior to transfer will have been subject to the national laws of the 
EU country where it was collected, and any conditions for or restrictions on 
its transfer according to those laws will have to be respected. 
The Safe Harbor Principles are relevant only when individually identified 
records are transferred or accessed. Statistical reporting relying on ag-
gregate employment data and/or the use of anonymized or pseudony-
mized data does not raise privacy concerns. 
2. Q: How do the Notice and Choice Principles apply to such information? 
A:  A U.S. organization that has received employee information from the 
EU under the Safe Harbor may disclose it to third parties and/or use it 
for different purposes only in accordance with the Notice and Choice 
Principles. For example, where an organization intends to use per-
sonal information collected through the employment relationship for 
non-employment-related purposes, such as marketing communica-
tions, the U.S. organization must provide the affected individuals with 
choice before doing so, unless they have already authorized the use of 
the information for such purposes. Moreover, such choices must not be 
used to restrict employment opportunities or take any punitive action 
against such employees. 
Access may not be refused on cost grounds if the individual offers to pay the 
costs. 
7. Q:  Is an organization required to provide access to personal information de-
rived from public records? 
A:  To clarify first, public records are those records kept by government agen-
cies or entities at any level that are open to consultation by the public in 
general. It is not necessary to apply the Access Principle to such informa-
tion as long as it is not combined with other personal information, apart 
from when small amounts of non-public record information are used for 
indexing or organizing public record information. However, any conditions 
for consultation established by the relevant jurisdiction are to be respect-
ed.  Where public record information is combined with other non-public 
record information (other than as specifically noted above), however, an 
organization must provide access to all such information, assuming it is 
not subject to other permitted exceptions. 
8. Q:  Does the Access Principle have to be applied to publicly available personal 
information? 
A:  As with public record information (see Q7), it is not necessary to pro-
vide access to information that is already publicly available to the pub-
lic at large, as long as it is not combined with non-publicly available  
information. 
9. Q:  How can an organization protect itself against repetitious or vexatious re-
quests for access? 
A:  An organization does not have to respond to such requests for access. 
For these reasons, organizations may charge a reasonable fee and may 
set reasonable limits on the number of times within a given period that 
access requests from a particular individual will be met. In setting such 
limitations, an organization should consider such factors as the frequen-
cy with which information is updated, the purpose for which the data are 
used, and the nature of the information. 
10. Q:  How can an organization protect itself against fraudulent requests for 
access? 
A:  An organization is not required to provide access unless it is supplied 
with sufficient information to allow it to confirm the identity of the per-
son making the request. 
28 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 29
the Safe Harbor Principles, rather than of national laws implementing the 
Directive. This will be the most efficient way to address the often overlap-
ping rights and obligations imposed by local labor law and labor agree-
ments as well as data protection law. 
A U.S. organization participating in the Safe Harbor that uses EU human 
resources data transferred from the Europe Union in the context of the 
employment relationship and that wishes such transfers to be covered 
by the Safe Harbor must therefore commit to cooperate in investigations 
by and to comply with the advice of competent EU authorities in such 
cases. The DPAs that have agreed to cooperate in this way will notify 
the European Commission and the Department of Commerce. If a U.S. 
organization participating in the Safe Harbor wishes to transfer human 
resources data from a Member State where the DPA has not so agreed, 
the provisions of FAQ 5 will apply. 
X.  Article 17 contracts 
Q:   When data is transferred from the EU to the United States only for processing 
purposes, will a contract be required, regardless of participation by the proces-
sor in the Safe Harbor ? 
A:   Yes. Data controllers in the European Union are always required to enter 
into a contract when a transfer for mere processing is made, whether the 
processing operation is carried out inside or outside the EU. The purpose 
of the contract is to protect the interests of the data controller, i.e. the per-
son or body who determines the purposes and means of processing, who 
retains full responsibility for the data vis-à-vis the individual(s) concerned. 
The contract thus specifies the processing to be carried out and any mea-
sures necessary to ensure that the data are kept secure. 
A U.S. organization participating in the Safe Harbor and receiving personal in-
formation from the EU merely for processing thus does not have to apply the 
Principles to this information, because the controller in the EU remains respon-
sible for it vis-à-vis the individual in accordance with the relevant EU provisions 
(which may be more stringent than the equivalent Safe Harbor Principles). 
Because adequate protection is provided by Safe Harbor participants, con-
tracts with Safe Harbor participants for mere processing do not require prior 
authorization (or such authorization will be granted automatically by the 
Member States) as would be required for contracts with recipients not partic-
ipating in the Safe Harbor or otherwise not providing adequate protection. 
It should be noted that certain generally applicable conditions for trans-
fer from some Member States may preclude other uses of such informa-
tion even after transfer outside the EU and such conditions will have to 
be respected. 
In addition, employers should make reasonable efforts to accommodate 
employee privacy preferences. This could include, for example, restrict-
ing access to the data, anonymizing certain data, or assigning codes or 
pseudonyms when the actual names are not required for the manage-
ment purpose at hand. 
To the extent and for the period necessary to avoid prejudicing the legiti-
mate interests of the organization in making promotions, appointments, 
or other similar employment decisions, an organization does not need to 
offer notice and choice. 
3. Q: How does the Access Principle apply? 
A:  The FAQs on access provide guidance on reasons which may justify de-
nying or limiting access on request in the human resources context. Of 
course, employers in the European Union must comply with local regula-
tions and ensure that European Union employees have access to such in-
formation as is required by law in their home countries, regardless of the 
location of data processing and storage. The Safe Harbor requires that an 
organization processing such data in the United States will cooperate in 
providing such access either directly or through the EU employer. 
4. Q:  How will enforcement be handled for employee data under the Safe Harbor 
Principles? 
A:  In so far as information is used only in the context of the employment 
relationship, primary responsibility for the data vis-à-vis the employee 
remains with the company in the EU. It follows that, where European em-
ployees make complaints about violations of their data protection rights 
and are not satisfied with the results of internal review, complaint, and 
appeal procedures (or any applicable grievance procedures under a con-
tract with a trade union), they should be directed to the state or national 
data protection or labor authority in the jurisdiction where the employee 
works. This also includes cases where the alleged mishandling of their 
personal information has taken place in the United States, is the respon-
sibility of the U.S. organization that has received the information from the 
employer and not of the employer and thus involves an alleged breach of 
30 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 31
operating the recourse mechanism, but such requirements should be trans-
parent and justified (for example to exclude complaints that fall outside the 
scope of the program or are for consideration in another forum), and should 
not have the effect of undermining the commitment to look into legitimate 
complaints. In addition, recourse mechanisms should provide individuals with 
full and readily available information about how the dispute resolution proce-
dure works when they file a complaint. Such information should include notice 
about the mechanism’s privacy practices, in conformity with the Safe Harbor 
Principles.1 They should also co-operate in the development of tools such as 
standard complaint forms to facilitate the complaint resolution process.
Remedies and Sanctions
The result of any remedies provided by the dispute resolution body should be 
that the effects of noncompliance are reversed or corrected by the organiza-
tion, in so far as feasible, and that future processing by the organization will be 
in conformity with the Principles and, where appropriate, that processing of 
the personal data of the individual who has brought the complaint will cease. 
Sanctions need to be rigorous enough to ensure compliance by the organiza-
tion with the Principles. A range of sanctions of varying degrees of severity will 
allow dispute resolution bodies to respond appropriately to varying degrees 
of non-compliance. Sanctions should include both publicity for findings of 
non-compliance and the requirement to delete data in certain circumstances.2 
Other sanctions could include suspension and removal of a seal, compensa-
tion for individuals for losses incurred as a result of non-compliance and in-
junctive orders. Private sector dispute resolution bodies and self-regulatory 
bodies must notify failures of Safe Harbor organizations to comply with their 
rulings to the governmental body with applicable jurisdiction or to the courts, 
as appropriate, and to notify the Department of Commerce (or its designee).
FTC Action
The FTC has committed to reviewing on a priority basis referrals received from 
privacy self-regulatory organizations, such as BBBOnline and TRUSTe, and EU 
Member States alleging non-compliance with the Safe Harbor Principles to de-
termine whether Section 5 of the FTC Act prohibiting unfair or deceptive acts 
XI. Dispute Resolution and Enforcement 
Q:  How should the dispute resolution requirements of the Enforcement Principle 
be implemented, and how will an organization’s persistent failure to comply 
with the Principles be handled?
A:   The Enforcement Principle sets out the requirements for Safe Harbor en-
forcement. How to meet the requirements of point (b) of the Principle is 
set out in the FAQ on verification (FAQ 7). This FAQ 11 addresses points (a) 
and (c), both of which require independent recourse mechanisms. These 
mechanisms may take different forms, but they must meet the Enforce-
ment Principle’s requirements. Organizations may satisfy the requirements 
through the following: 
(1)  Compliance with private sector developed privacy programs that in-
corporate the Safe Harbor Principles into their rules and that include 
effective enforcement mechanisms of the type described in the En-
forcement Principle; 
(2)  Compliance with legal or regulatory supervisory authorities that 
provide for handling of individual complaints and dispute resolu-
tion; or 
(3)  Commitment to cooperate with data protection authorities located 
in the European Union or their authorized representatives. 
This list is intended to be illustrative and not limiting. The private sector may 
design other mechanisms to provide enforcement, so long as they meet the 
requirements of the Enforcement Principle and the FAQs. Please note that the 
Enforcement Principle’s requirements are additional to the requirement set 
forth in paragraph 3 of the introduction to the Principles that self-regulatory 
efforts must be enforceable under Article 5 of the Federal Trade Commission 
Act or similar statute.
Recourse Mechanisms
Consumers should be encouraged to raise any complaints they may have with 
the relevant organization before proceeding to independent recourse mecha-
nisms. Whether a recourse mechanism is independent is a factual question that 
can be demonstrated in a number of ways, for example, by transparent compo-
sition and financing or a proven track record. As required by the enforcement 
principle, the recourse available to individuals must be readily available and 
affordable. Dispute resolution bodies should look into each complaint received 
from individuals unless they are obviously unfounded or frivolous. This does 
not preclude the establishment of eligibility requirements by the organization 
 1.  Dispute resolution bodies are not required to conform with the enforcement principle. They may 
also derogate from the Principles where they encounter conflicting obligations or explicit authorizations in the 
performance of their specific tasks.
 2. Dispute resolutions bodies have discretion about the circumstances in which they use these sanc-
tions. The sensitivity of the data concerned is one factor to be taken into consideration in deciding whether 
deletion of data should be required, as is whether an organization has collected, used or disclosed information 
in blatant contravention of the Principles. 
32 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 33
A:  Generally, the purpose of the Choice Principle is to ensure that personal 
information is used and disclosed in ways that are consistent with the in-
dividual’s expectations and choices. Accordingly, an individual should be 
able to exercise “opt out” (or choice) of having personal information used 
for direct marketing at any time subject to reasonable limits established 
by the organization, such as giving the organization time to make the opt 
out effective. An organization may also require sufficient information to 
confirm the identity of the individual requesting the “opt out.” In the United 
States, individuals may be able to exercise this option through the use of 
a central “opt out” program such as the Direct Marketing Association’s Mail 
Preference Service.  Organizations that participate in the Direct Marketing 
Association’s Mail Preference Service should promote its availability to con-
sumers who do not wish to receive commercial information. In any event, 
an individual should be given a readily available and affordable mecha-
nism to exercise this option. 
Similarly, an organization may use information for certain direct marketing 
purposes when it is impracticable to provide the individual with an oppor-
tunity to opt out before using the information, if the organization promptly 
gives the individual such opportunity at the same time (and upon request 
at any time) to decline (at no cost to the individual) to receive any further 
direct marketing communications and the organization complies with the 
individual’s wishes. 
XIII. Travel Information 
Q:  When can airline passenger reservation and other travel information, such as 
frequent flyer or hotel reservation information and special handling needs, 
such as meals to meet religious requirements or physical assistance, be trans-
ferred to organizations located outside the EU? 
A:  Such information may be transferred in several different circumstances. 
Under Article 26 of the Directive, personal data may be transferred “to a 
third country which does not ensure an adequate level of protection within 
the meaning of Article 25(2)” on the condition that it (1) is necessary to 
provide the services requested by the consumer or to fulfill the terms of 
an agreement, such as a “frequent flyer” agreement; or (2) has been unam-
biguously consented to by the consumer. U.S. organizations subscribing 
to the Safe Harbor provide adequate protection for personal data and may 
therefore receive data transfers from the EU without meeting those condi-
tions or other conditions set out in Article 26 of the Directive. Since the Safe 
Harbor includes specific rules for sensitive information, such information 
or practices in commerce has been violated. If the FTC concludes that it has 
reason[s] to believe Section 5 has been violated, it may resolve the matter by 
seeking an administrative cease and desist order prohibiting the challenged 
practices or by filing a complaint in a federal district court, which if successful 
could result in a federal court order to same effect. The FTC may obtain civil 
penalties for violations of an administrative cease and desist order and may 
pursue civil or criminal contempt for violation of a federal court order. The FTC 
will notify the Department of Commerce of any such actions it takes. The De-
partment of Commerce encourages other government bodies to notify it of 
the final disposition of any such referrals or other rulings determining adher-
ence to the Safe Harbor Principles. 
Persistent Failure to Comply
If an organization persistently fails to comply with the Principles, it is no lon-
ger entitled to benefit from the Safe Harbor. Persistent failure to comply arises 
where an organization that has self-certified to the Department of Commerce 
(or its designee) refuses to comply with a final determination by any self-regu-
latory or government body or where such a body determines that an organiza-
tion frequently fails to comply with the Principles to the point where its claim 
to comply is no longer credible. In these cases, the organization must promptly 
notify the Department of Commerce (or its designee) of such facts. Failure to 
do so may be actionable under the False Statements Act(18 U.S.C. § 1001). 
The Department (or its designee) will indicate on the public list it maintains of 
organizations self-certifying adherence to the Safe Harbor Principles any noti-
fication it receives of persistent failure to comply, whether it is received from 
the organization itself, from a self-regulatory body, or from a government body, 
but only after first providing thirty (30) days’ notice and an opportunity to re-
spond to the organization that has failed to comply. Accordingly, the public list 
maintained by the Department of Commerce (or its designee) will make clear 
which organizations are assured and which organizations are no longer assured  
of Safe Harbor benefits.
An organization applying to participate in a self-regulatory body for the pur-
poses of re-qualifying for the Safe Harbor must provide that body with full 
information about its prior participation in the Safe Harbor. 
XII. Choice - Timing of Opt Out 
Q:  Does the Choice Principle permit an individual to exercise choice only at the 
beginning of a relationship or at any time? 
34 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 35
along with other data collected as part of the clinical trial, however, if 
this was made clear to the participant in the notice at the time he or she 
agreed to participate. 
4. Q:  Pharmaceutical and medical device companies are allowed to provide 
personal data from clinical trials conducted in the EU to regulators in the 
United States for regulatory and supervision purposes. Are similar transfers 
allowed to parties other than regulators, such as company locations and 
other researchers? 
A: Yes, consistent with the Principles of Notice and Choice. 
5. Q:  To ensure objectivity in many clinical trials, participants, and often investi-
gators, as well, cannot be given access to information about which treat-
ment each participant may be receiving. Doing so would jeopardize the va-
lidity of the research study and results. Will participants in such clinical trials 
(referred to as “blinded” studies) have access to the data on their treatment 
during the trial? 
A:  No, such access does not have to be provided to a participant if this re-
striction has been explained when the participant entered the trial and 
the disclosure of such information would jeopardize the integrity of the 
research effort. Agreement to participate in the trial under these condi-
tions is a reasonable forgoing of the right of access. Following the conclu-
sion of the trial and analysis of the results, participants should have access 
to their data if they request it. They should seek it primarily from the phy-
sician or other health care provider from whom they received treatment 
within the clinical trial, or secondarily from the sponsoring company. 
6. Q:  Does a pharmaceutical or medical device firm have to apply the Safe Harbor 
Principles with respect to notice, choice, onward transfer, and access in its 
product safety and efficacy monitoring activities, including the reporting of 
adverse events and the tracking of patients/subjects using certain medicines 
or medical devices (e.g. a pacemaker)? 
A:  No, to the extent that adherence to the Principles interferes with com-
pliance with regulatory requirements. This is true both with respect to 
reports by, for example, health care providers, to pharmaceutical and 
medical device companies, and with respect to reports by pharmaceuti-
cal and medical device companies to government agencies like the Food 
and Drug Administration. 
7. Q:  Invariably, research data are uniquely key-coded at their origin by the prin-
cipal investigator so as not to reveal the identity of individual data subjects. 
(which may need to be collected, for example, in connection with custom-
ers’ needs for physical assistance) may be included in transfers to Safe Har-
bor participants. In all cases, however, the organization transferring the 
information has to respect the law in the EU Member State in which it is 
operating, which may inter alia impose special conditions for the handling 
of sensitive data. 
XIV. Pharmaceutical and Medical Products 
1.  Q:  If personal data are collected in the EU and transferred to the United States 
for pharmaceutical research and/or other purposes, do Member State laws 
or the Safe Harbor Principles apply? 
A:  Member State law applies to the collection of the personal data and to 
any processing that takes place prior to the transfer to the United States. 
The Safe Harbor Principles apply to the data once they have been trans-
ferred to the United States. Data used for pharmaceutical research and 
other purposes should be anonymized when appropriate. 
2. Q:  Personal data developed in specific medical or pharmaceutical research 
studies often play a valuable role in future scientific research. Where personal 
data collected for one research study are transferred to a U.S. organization 
in the Safe Harbor, may the organization use the data for a new scientific 
research activity? 
A: Yes, if appropriate notice and choice have been provided in the first in-
stance. Such a notice should provide information about any future specific 
uses of the data, such as periodic follow-up, related studies, or marketing. 
It is understood that not all future uses of the data can be specified, since 
a new research use could arise from new insights on the original data, 
new medical discoveries and advances, and public health and regulatory 
developments. Where appropriate, the notice should therefore include an 
explanation that personal data may be used in future medical and phar-
maceutical research activities that are unanticipated. If the use is not con-
sistent with the general research purpose(s) for which the data were origi-
nally collected, or to which the individual has consented subsequently, 
new consent must be obtained. 
3. Q:  What happens to an individual’s data if a participant decides voluntarily or 
at the request of the sponsor to withdraw from the clinical trial? 
A:  Participants may decide or be asked to withdraw from a clinical trial at any 
time. Any data collected previous to withdrawal may still be processed 
36 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 37
Appendix A: Sample Safe Harbor Application
Certifying an organization’s adherence to the Safe Harbor
To expedite the certification process, prepare the required information before 
completing this form. If you have any difficulty completing this form or have 
any other questions concerning the Safe Harbor self-certification process, 
please e-mail safe.harbor@mail.doc.gov or contact Damon C. Greer at the In-
ternational Trade Administration, Department of Commerce, damon.greer@
mail.doc.gov, or 202-482-5023.
Public reporting for this collection is estimated to range from 20-40 minutes 
per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, and completing 
and reviewing the collection of information. All responses to this collection of 
information are voluntary, and will be provided confidentially to the extent al-
lowed under the Freedom of Information Act. Notwithstanding any other pro-
visions of law, no person is required to respond to nor shall a person be sub-
ject to a penalty for failure to comply with a collection of information subject 
to the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act unless that collection of 
information displays a current valid OMB Control Number. Send comments 
regarding the burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of infor-
mation, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to the Reports Clear-
ance Officer, International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce,  
Room 4001, 14th and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20230.
Organization Information
Organization Name:
Address: 
City:  _________________________________________ State:
Zip: _______________________ Phone: ________________________Fax:
Website (Optional):
Organization Contact Information 
(For handling of complaints, access requests, and any other issues arising un-
der the Safe Harbor)
Contact Office:
Contact Name (Optional): 
Contact Title (Optional): 
Pharmaceutical companies sponsoring such research do not receive the key. 
The unique key code is held only by the researcher, so that he/she can iden-
tify the research subject under special circumstances (e.g. if follow-up medi-
cal attention is required). Does a transfer from the EU to the United States of 
data coded in this way constitute a transfer of personal data that is subject 
to the Safe Harbor Principles? 
A:  No. This would not constitute a transfer of personal data that would be 
subject to the Principles. 
XV. Public Record and Publicly Available Information 
Q:  Is it necessary to apply the Notice, Choice and Onward Transfer Principles to 
public record information or publicly available information? 
A:  It is not necessary to apply the Notice, Choice or Onward Transfer Principles 
to public record information, as long as it is not combined with non-public 
record information and as long as any conditions for consultation estab-
lished by the relevant jurisdiction are respected. 
Also, it is generally not necessary to apply the Notice, Choice or Onward 
Transfer Principles to publicly available information unless the European 
transferor indicates that such information is subject to restrictions that re-
quire application of those Principles by the organization for the uses it in-
tends. Organizations will have no liability for how such information is used 
by those obtaining such information from published materials. 
Where an organization is found to have intentionally made personal infor-
mation public in contravention of the Principles so that it or others may 
benefit from these exceptions, it will cease to qualify for the benefits of the 
Safe Harbor.
38 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 39
List any privacy programs in which your organization is a member for Safe 
Harbor purposes (See FAQ 6):
What is your organization’s verification method (e.g., In-house, Third Party? 
(See FAQ 7)
What independent recourse mechanism(s) is(are) available to investigate un-
resolved complaints (e.g., private sector developed dispute resolution mech-
anisms that incorporate the Safe Harbor framework or EU data protection 
authorities?) (See FAQ 11)
What personal data processed by your organization is covered by the Safe Har-
bor? (e.g., offline, on-line, manually processed data, human resources data)
Do you plan to cover human resources data? Yes  No
If yes, you need to agree to cooperate and comply with the European Data 
Protection Authorities (See FAQs 5 & 9). Do you agree to cooperate and com-
ply with the European Data Protection Authorities?  Yes  No
Contact Phone:  _________________Contact Fax: _____________________
Contact Email:  __________________________________________________
Corporate Officer who is certifying the organization’s adherence to the Safe  
Harbor Framework
Corporate Officer Name: 
Corporate Officer Title: 
Corporate Officer Phone:
Corporate Officer Fax: 
Corporate Officer Email:
Description of the activities of the organization with respect to personal infor-
mation received from the EU
Description of the organization’s privacy policy for personal information
Please enter the effective date of your organization’s privacy policy:
Please provide the location of your organization’s privacy policy:
Please indicate the appropriate statutory body that has jurisdiction to hear 
any claims against the organization regarding possible unfair or deceptive 
practices and violations of laws or regulations governing privacy:
Choose One:    Federal Trade Commission (FTC)   Department of Transportation
40 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification U.S. Department of Commerce 41
Appendix B: Sample Privacy Policies
We have included here three privacy policy examples for your reference; 
these were chosen at random and are not intended to serve as an official 
endorsement or a specific U.S. Government standard. They incorporate the 
requisite tenets of the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework while at the same time 
uniquely represent their individual company and their industry privacy con-
cerns. Should you have any questions about what is required in the text of a 
privacy policy in order to be compliant with the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Frame-
work, please refer to Appendix A, the Helpful Hints Guide.
Privacy Policy Example A
Data Privacy at XYZ
XYZ has established a comprehensive privacy program, including a global pri-
vacy office and a chief privacy officer, designed to help us respect and protect 
your data privacy rights. This statement includes both XYZ’s European Union - 
U.S. Safe Harbor Privacy Statement and the Website Privacy Statement. 
U.S. - EU Safe Harbor Privacy Statement
For personal information of employees, consumers, healthcare professionals, 
medical research subjects and investigators, customers, investors, and gov-
ernment officials that XYZ receives from the European Economic Area, XYZ 
has committed to handling such personal information in accordance with the 
Safe Harbor Principles. XYZ’s Safe Harbor certification can be found at http://
web.ita.doc.gov/safeharbor/shlist.nsf/webPages/safe+harbor+list. For more 
information about the Safe Harbor Principles, please visit the U.S. Department 
of Commerce’s Website at http://export.gov/safeharbor/.
XYZ Website Privacy Statement
XYZ respects the privacy of visitors to its websites, as a result, we have devel-
oped this website privacy policy. This website privacy policy applies only to 
the operation of websites that directly link to this policy when you click on 
“privacy statement” in the website footer. 
Through this website XYZ will collect information that can identify you, such 
as your name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and other similar 
information (“Your Information”) when it is voluntarily submitted to us (how-
ever, see discussion below about “IP Addresses” if you have a broadband 
connection). We will use Your Information to respond to requests you may 
make of us, and from time to time, we may refer to Your Information to better 
Which EU/EEA Countries do you receive information from? 
(Select all that apply)
None Cyprus Finland Hungary Latvia   Portugal  
Spain 
Switzerland*
Austria Czech 
Republic
France    Malta
Iceland
Liechtenstein 
Netherlands Romania  Sweden Belgium  Denmark Germany  
Ireland Lithuania Norway Slovakia United 
     Kingdom
Bulgaria
Estonia Greece Italy Luxembourg Poland Slovenia
Please select your appropriate Industry Sectors. (Select up to 4)
Other TBD TBD TBD TBD   TBD  
TBD TBD TBD TBD    TBD TBD 
TBD TBD  TBD TBD  TBD TBD  
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD
Please select the appropriate level of sales:
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD
How many employees does your organization have?
TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD
Please print out your completed form now to verify that the information 
provided is correct and to retain a copy for your files.
If you are ready to submit the self-certification for your organization simply 
click the SUBMIT button below.
SUBMIT
*See Appendix D for additional information
42 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 43
possible that your IP Address that we collect, or even perhaps a cookie we 
use, may contain information that could be deemed identifiable. This is be-
cause with some broadband connections your IP Address doesn’t change 
(it is “static”) and could be associated with your personal computer. We use  
your IP address to report aggregate information on use and to help improve 
the website. 
You should be aware that this site is not intended for, or designed to attract, 
individuals under the age of 18. We do not collect personally identifiable infor-
mation from any person we actually know is an individual under the age of 18. 
Areas of this website that collect Your Information use industry standard se-
cure socket layer encryption (SSL); however, to take advantage of this your 
browser must support encryption protection (found in Internet Explorer re-
lease 3.0 and above). 
We may share Your Information with agents, contractors or partners of XYZ  
in connection with services that these individuals or entities perform for, or 
with, XYZ. These agents, contractors or partners are restricted from using this 
data in any way other than to provide services for XYZ, or services for the col-
laboration in which they and XYZ are engaged (for example, some of our prod-
ucts are developed and marketed through joint agreements with other compa-
nies). We may, for example, provide your information to agents, contractors or 
partners for hosting our databases, for data processing services, or so that they  
can mail you information that you requested. 
XYZ reserves the right to share Your Information to respond to duly autho-
rized information requests of governmental authorities or where required by 
law. In exceptionally rare circumstances where national, state or company se-
curity is at issue (such as with the World Trade Center terrorist act in Septem-
ber, 2001), XYZ reserves the right to share our entire database of visitors and 
customers with appropriate governmental authorities. 
We may also provide Your Information to a third party in connection with the 
sale, assignment, or other transfer of the business of this website to which the 
information relates, in which case we will require any such buyer to agree to 
treat Your Information in accordance with this Privacy Policy. 
As a convenience to our visitors, this Website currently contains links to a 
number of sites that we believe may offer useful information. The policies 
and procedures we described here do not apply to those sites. We suggest 
contacting those sites directly for information on their privacy, security, data 
collection, and distribution policies. 
understand your needs and how we can improve our websites, products and 
services. We may also use Your Information to contact you and/or provide 
you with general health information (like information on certain health con-
ditions) as well as information about our products and services. We may also  
enhance or merge Your Information with data obtained from third parties for 
the same purposes. 
Any other information transferred by you in connection with your visit to this 
site (“Other Information” - that is, information that cannot be used to iden-
tify you) may be included in databases owned and maintained by XYZ or its 
agents. XYZ retains all rights to these databases and the information con-
tained in them. Other Information we collect may include your IP Address and 
other information gathered through our weblogs and cookies (see below). 
This site may use a technology known as web beacons - sometimes called single-
pixel gifs - that allow this site to collect web log information. A web beacon is a 
graphic on a web page or in an e-mail message designed to track pages viewed 
or messages opened. Web log information is gathered when you visit one of 
our websites by the computer that hosts our website (called a “webserver”). The 
webserver automatically recognizes some non-personal information, such as 
the date and time you visited our site, the pages you visited, the website you 
came from, the type of browser you are using (e.g., Internet Explorer), the type 
of operating system you are using (e.g., Windows 2000), and the domain name 
and address of your Internet service provider (e.g., AOL). We may also include 
web beacons in promotional e-mail messages in order to determine whether 
messages have been opened.
This website may use a technology called a “cookie”. A cookie is a piece of in-
formation that our webserver sends to your computer (actually to your browser 
file) when you access a website. Then when you come back our site will detect 
whether you have one of our cookies on your computer. Our cookies help pro-
vide additional functionality to the site and help us analyze site usage more ac-
curately. For instance, our site may set a cookie on your browser that keeps you 
from needing to remember and then enter a password more than once during 
a visit to the site.
This website uses Internet Protocol (IP) Addresses. An IP Address is a number 
assigned to your computer by your Internet service provider so you can ac-
cess the Internet. Generally, an IP address changes each time you connect 
to the Internet (it is a “dynamic” address). Note, however, that if you have a 
broadband connection, depending on your individual circumstance, it is 
44 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 45
“Sensitive Personal Information” means personal information that reveals 
race, ethnic origin, sexual orientation, political opinions, religious or philosoph-
ical beliefs, trade union membership or that concerns an individual’s health. 
Principles
Notice
Company shall inform an individual of the purpose for which it collects and 
uses the Personal Information and the types of non-agent third parties to 
which the Company discloses or may disclose that Information. Company 
shall provide the individual with the choice and means for limiting the use 
and disclosure of their Personal Information. Notice will be provided in clear 
and conspicuous language when individuals are first asked to provide Per-
sonal Information to the Company, or as soon as practicable thereafter, and 
in any event before the Company uses or discloses the Information for a pur-
pose other than for which it was originally collected. 
Choice
The Company will offer individuals the opportunity to choose (opt out) 
whether their Personal Information is (1) to be disclosed to a third party or 
(2) to be used for a purpose other than the purpose for which it was origi-
nally collected or subsequently authorized by the individual. For Sensitive 
Personal Information, the Company will give individuals the opportunity to 
affirmatively or explicitly (opt out) consent to the disclosure of the informa-
tion for a purpose other than the purpose for which it was originally collected 
or subsequently authorized by the individual. Company shall treat Sensitive 
Personal Information received from an individual the same as the individual 
would treat and identify it as Sensitive Personal Information. 
Onward Transfers
Prior to disclosing Personal Information to a third party, Company shall notify 
the individual of such disclosure and allow the individual the choice (opt out) 
of such disclosure. Company shall ensure that any third party for which Per-
sonal Information may be disclosed subscribes to the Principles or are subject 
to law providing the same level of privacy protection as is required by the Prin-
ciples and agree in writing to provide an adequate level of privacy protection. 
Data Security
Company shall take reasonable steps to protect the Information from loss, 
misuse and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration and destruction. 
Company has put in place appropriate physical, electronic and manage-
rial procedures to safeguard and secure the Information from loss, misuse, 
To be removed from our contact lists, please write to XYZ at the following  
address: 
XYZ
P.O. Box #### 
City, State Zip Code
Please note that you may continue to receive materials while we are updating 
our lists. 
We may update this Web site Privacy Policy from time to time. When we do 
update it, for your convenience, we will make the updated policy available on 
this page. 
Last Updated: January 1, 2008
Privacy Policy Example B
XYZ Safe Harbor Policy 
Introduction
XYZ, Inc. (the “Company”) is a leading pure-play managed services provider 
that offers security assessment, detection and prevention services that help 
companies, governments and organizations safeguard their computer net-
works and systems. Protecting consumer privacy is important to the Company. 
The Company and its affiliated United States subsidiaries (hereinafter collec-
tively referred to as the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) adhere to the Safe Harbor 
Agreement concerning the transfer of personal data from the European Union 
(“EU”) to the United States of America. Accordingly, we follow the Safe Harbor 
Principles published by the U.S. Department of Commerce (the “Principles”) 
with respect to all such data. If there is any conflict between the policies in this 
privacy policy and the Principles, the Principles shall govern. This privacy pol-
icy outlines our general policy and practices for implementing the Principles, 
including the types of information we gather, how we use it and the notice 
and choice affected individuals have regarding our use of and their ability to 
correct that information. This privacy policy applies to all personal information 
received by the Company whether in electronic, paper or verbal format. 
Definitions
“Personal Information” or “Information” means information that (1) is trans-
ferred from the EU to the United States; (2) is recorded in any form; (3) is about, 
or pertains to a specific individual; and (4) can be linked to that individual. 
46 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 47
Contact Information
Questions, comments or complaints regarding the Company’s Safe Harbor Poli-
cy or data collection and processing practices can be mailed or emailed to: 
XYZ
Attn: Legal Department
PO Box ####
City, State Zip
Effective date: January 1, 2008 
Privacy Policy Example C
To learn more about our privacy practices, see our Privacy Policy Details. 
XYZ believes in protecting your privacy. When we collect personal information 
from you on our website, we follow the privacy principles of (an independent re-
source mechanism) and comply with the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework as set 
forth by the U.S. Department of Commerce regarding the collection, use and re-
tention of personal data from the European Union. These are our promises to you:
1.    Notice. When we collect your personal information, we’ll give you timely and 
appropriate notice describing what personal information we’re collecting, 
how we’ll use it, and the types of third parties with whom we may share it. 
2.    Choice. We’ll give you choices about the ways we use and share your 
personal information, and we’ll respect the choices you make. 
3.    Relevance. We’ll collect only as much personal information as we need 
for specific, identified purposes, and we won’t use it for other purposes 
without obtaining your consent. 
4.    Retention. We’ll keep your personal information only as long as we need it 
for the purposes for which we collected it, or as permitted by law. 
5.   Accuracy. We’ll take appropriate steps to make sure the personal information 
in our records is accurate. 
6.   Access. We’ll provide ways for you to access your personal information, as 
required by law, so you can correct inaccuracies. 
7.   Security. We’ll take appropriate physical, technical, and organizational 
measures to protect your personal information from loss, misuse, 
unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration, and destruction. 
unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration or destruction. Company cannot 
guarantee the security of Information on or transmitted via the Internet. 
Data Integrity
Company shall only process Personal Information in a way that is compatible 
with and relevant for the purpose for which it was collected or authorized 
by the individual. To the extent necessary for those purposes, Company shall 
take reasonable steps to ensure that Personal Information is accurate, com-
plete, current and reliable for its intended use. 
Access
Company shall allow an individual access to their Personal Information and al-
low the individual to correct, amend or delete inaccurate information, except 
where the burden or expense of providing access would be disproportionate 
to the risks to the privacy of the individual in the case in question or where 
the rights of persons other than the individual would be violated. 
Enforcement
Company uses a self-assessment approach to assure compliance with this 
privacy policy and periodically verifies that the policy is accurate, compre-
hensive for the information intended to be covered, prominently displayed, 
completely implemented and accessible and in conformity with the Princi-
ples. We encourage interested persons to raise any concerns using the con-
tact information provided and we will investigate and attempt to resolve any 
complaints and disputes regarding use and disclosure of Personal Informa-
tion in accordance with the Principles. 
If a complaint or dispute cannot be resolved through our internal process, we 
agree to dispute resolution using (an independent resource mechanism) as a 
third party resolution provider. 
Amendments
This privacy policy may be amended from time to time consistent with the re-
quirements of the Safe Harbor. We will post any revised policy on this website. 
Information Subject to Other Policies
The Company is committed to following the Principles for all Personal Infor-
mation within the scope of the Safe Harbor Agreement. However, certain 
information is subject to policies of the Company that may differ in some  
respects from the general policies set forth in this privacy policy. 
48 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 49
Appendix C: Dispute Resolution Providers
Under the Safe Harbor’s Enforcement Principle, organizations self-certifying 
to Safe Harbor must establish an independent recourse mechanism available 
to investigate unresolved complaints. 
An organization wishing to certify must ensure that its recourse mechanism is 
in place prior to self-certification.
The following private sector organizations provide dispute resolution pro-
grams that assist in compliance with the Safe Harbor Enforcement Principles:
BBB OnLine: www.bbbonline.org/
TRUSTe: http //www.truste.org/
AICPA WebTrust: www.aicpa.org/trustservices/
Direct Marketing Association: www.the-dma.org/
Entertainment Software Rating Board: www.esrb.org/
JAMS: http://www.jamsadr.com/
American Arbitration Association: http://www.adr.org/
This list is not exhaustive, and the Department of Commerce does not require 
or endorse any particular program.
European Data Protection Authorities
Alternatively, organizations participating in the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor may 
choose to cooperate and comply with the European Data Protection Authori-
ties (DPAs). 
Please note that if human resources data is being covered in the organiza-
tion’s self-certification, the organization must agree to cooperate and comply 
with the DPAs for the purposes of handling unresolved complaints.
Swiss Federal Data Protection and Information Commissioner
Alternatively, organizations participating in the U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor may 
choose to cooperate and comply with the Swiss Federal Data Protection and 
Information Commissioner (FDPIC).
Following are descriptions of three representative dispute resolution bodies 
(BBB, DMA and TRUSTe) and the services they offer. 
Please note that if human resources data is being covered in the organiza-
tion’s self-certification, the organization must agree to cooperate and comply 
with the FDPIC for the purposes of handling unresolved complaints.
8.   Sharing. Except as described in this policy, we won’t share your personal 
information with third parties without your consent. 
9.   International Transfer. If we transfer your personal information to another 
country, we’ll take appropriate measures to protect your privacy and the 
personal information we transfer. 
10.  Enforcement. We’ll regularly review how we’re meeting these privacy 
promises, and we’ll provide an independent way to resolve complaints about 
our privacy practices. 
To access your information, ask questions about our privacy practices, or issue 
a complaint, contact us at:
XYZ
PO Box ####
City, State Zip 
(###) ###-####
Email Address 
If your inquiry is not satisfactorily addressed, contact the (an independent 
resource mechanism) Dispute Resolution Process. (an independent resource 
mechanism) will serve as a liaison with the website to resolve your concerns.
To learn more about our privacy practices, see our Privacy Policy details. 
50 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 51
Direct Marketing AssociatIon Member Safe Harbor Program
How Can the DMA Safe Harbor Program Assist Its Participating Member 
Companies? 
?   The DMA serves as a third-party dispute and enforcement mechanism for 
unresolved European data privacy complaints (The DMA has at least four 
decades of experience in addressing and satisfactorily resolving consumer 
disputes);
The DMA provides technical assistance and extensive educational materials 
available on the DMA website, www.the-dma.org/safeharbor.
?   Each participant receives a staff review of the company’s Safe Harbor pri-
vacy policy statement; and 
?   The DMA provides a DMA Safe Harbor Program mark that companies can 
display on their relevant online or offline materials.
Who is eligible to participate in the DMA Safe Harbor Program?
The DMA Safe Harbor Program is only available to DMA Members. DMA com-
panies wishing to participate in our Safe harbor program must submit an ap-
plication which includes: a signed contract, company contact sheet, copy of 
their Safe Harbor privacy policy statement and annual Safe Harbor fee.
Questions? www.the-dma.org/safeharbor
For more information about the DMA Safe Harbor Program, contact Lisa 
Shosteck at 202.955.5030 ext. 2436 or lshosteck@the-dma.org.
For more information about membership in the DMA, contact Paulette Peach with 
our membership department at: 212.768.7277 ext. 1793 or ppeach@the-dma.org.
TRUSTe Safe Harbor Fact Sheet
What is the EU-US Safe Harbor Framework?
If you do business with European citizens, TRUSTe can help you certify your 
compliance with the EU Directive on Data Protection. The Directive prohibits 
the transfer of European cititzens’ personal data to non-European Union na-
tions that do not meet the EU’s “adequacy” standard for privacy protection. 
The U.S. Department of Commerce, in concert with the European Commis-
sion, developed a “Safe Harbor Framework” that allows US organizations to 
comply with the Directive by abiding by a set of Safe Harbor Privacy Princi-
ples. Companies certify their compliance with these Principles on the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce Web site. The Framework was approved by the EU in 
2000 and gives companies that abide by the Principles assurance that the EU 
will consider their practices “adequate” privacy protections for EU citizens.
BBB EU Safe Harbor Dispute Resolution Procedure
The Better Business Bureau (“BBB”) is an unbiased organization that fosters 
honest and responsive relationships between businesses and consumers– in-
stilling consumer confidence and contributing to a trustworthy marketplace. 
BBB provides objective advice, free business Reliability Reports and charity 
Wise Giving Reports, and educational information on topics affecting market-
place trust. To further promote trust, BBB also offers complaint and dispute 
resolution support for consumers and businesses when there is difference in 
viewpoints.
The BBB EU Safe Harbor Dispute Resolution Procedure (“Procedure”) ful-
fills the dispute resolution mechanism requirement of the Department 
of Commerce’s Safe Harbor Certification Program. As a recognized leader 
in business-to-consumer dispute resolution programs, the BBB provides 
for the review of complaints filed by EU citizens alleging that a business 
participating in the Procedure has failed to comply with the Safe Harbor  
Privacy Principles. 
In the event that the BBB Procedure receives a complaint from an EU citizen, 
the first step in the dispute resolution process is for the BBB Procedure to con-
tact the business. The BBB Procedure will ensure that the complainant has 
made a good faith effort to resolve his or her claim directly with the business, 
and then will attempt an informal mediation between the EU citizen and the 
business with the goal of rectifying the EU citizen’s concern.  If the BBB Proce-
dure is unable to address the EU citizen’s concerns informally with the busi-
ness, the second step is the more formal Data Privacy Review (“Review”). In the 
Review, the complainant submits a statement of his or her complaint, which is 
forwarded to the business. The business replies with an answer. Each party has 
one further opportunity to respond. When all information has been submitted, 
the BBB Procedure reviews the information and will issue a decision. If appro-
priate, the BBB Procedure will recommend corrective action to the business to 
ensure that all Safe Harbor Privacy Principles are met. 
The third step in the Procedure is the Data Privacy Appeal. Both parties have the 
right to appeal the Review decision. In the event of an appeal, the case will be 
forwarded by the BBB to an independent expert in the privacy field. The appeal 
will be determined by the expert, who will issue a final decision in the case.  
To register for participation in the BBB EU Safe Harbor Dispute Resolution Pro-
cedure, please visit us at us.bbb.org. Click on BBB For Businesses, and, under 
Programs and Services, Safe Harbor Privacy Program. For more information, 
please contact us at 800-334-2406 or email eusafeharbor@council.bbb.org. 
 U.S. Department of Commerce 5352 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification
Appendix D: U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor  
Framework
In 2009, the Department of Commerce and the Federal Data Protection and  
Information Commission of Switzerland completed negotiations on establish-
ing a data protection framework between the two countries. An exchange of 
letters was signed by the Acting Under Secretary for International Trade, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, and the Federal Data Protection and Information 
Commissioner (FDPIC) on the creation of a `U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Framework’. 
The framework will simplify the transfer of personal data by Swiss firms to 
American companies that self-certify to the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
To bridge the different privacy approaches and provide a streamlined means 
for U.S. organizations to comply with the Swiss data protection law, the U.S. 
Department of Commerce in consultation with the Federal Data Protection 
and Information Commission developed a “Safe Harbor” framework.  
The process for self-certifying to the U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Framework is 
identical to that for self-certification to the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework. 
The certification form is identical and we have added Switzerland to the coun-
try selection imbedded in the application form. 
Please note that you do not have to join the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor in order to 
self-certify to the U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Framework or vice versa. Organiza-
tions should also note that when they select “Switzerland” as a country from 
which they receive personal data, they are self-certifying compliance to the 
U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Framework. It is critically important that the U.S.-Swiss 
Safe Harbor privacy principles, the 15 FAQs, and the enforcement statement 
be reviewed before executing the self-certification form. Although the respec-
tive U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor and U.S.-EU Safe Harbor privacy principles, 15 FAQs, 
and enforcement statements are similar, they are not identical.
Why TRUSTe’s EU Safe Harbor Seal?
The TRUSTe EU Safe Harbor Seal Program verifies your compliance with the 
Safe Harbor Framework, includes alternative dispute resolution, and helps 
your organization get ready for self-certification with the U.S. Department of 
Commerce. Displaying the TRUSTe EU Safe Harbor seal signals to consumers 
around the globe that you take their privacy seriously.
What are the benefits?
1) Streamline legal compliance with the EU Safe Harbor Framework:
- Verifies compliance with the Safe Harbor Privacy Principles.
-  Provides dispute resolution of consumer complaints about data collected 
online or offline, as required for Safe Harbor status.
-  Prepares you for self-certification with the U.S. Department of Com-
merce.
2)  Builds trust and confidence:
-  Brands your organization and Web site as EU-US Safe Harbor compliant by 
posting the distinctive EU Safe Harbor seal.
-  Third-party certification emphasizes your organization’s commitment to 
privacy and consumer choice. 
TRUSTe EU Members
Many of the world’s leading companies and organizations protect the privacy 
of their customers with TRUSTe, including:
Adobe Systems Monster
Apple Napster
aQuantive ORACLE
Avaya Salesforce.com
Carlson Companies Harrisinteractive.com SkillSoft 
IBM Sybase
Logitech TNS
McAfee, Inc. Varian Medical Systems
Microsoft
 U.S. Department of Commerce 55
 3.  Your organization may use the mark for one year from the initial self-
certification date. Authorization to use the mark is renewable each year 
subject to the organization’s reaffirmation to comply with the Safe Harbor 
Framework.
 4.  The mark may not be used for marketing or advertisements, and/or to 
imply any endorsement, authorization, or affiliation that does not exist 
with respect to the U.S. Department of Commerce or the United States 
Government.
5.  The mark may not be used in a manner that embarrasses the Department 
or the United States Government. 
 6.  The mark may be placed on the organization’s website on its home page or 
on the page where the privacy policy is found.
 7.  In each instance in which you post the mark on your organization’s website, 
you must:
a.  Immediately above the top edge of the mark, display the following 
language, in a clear and conspicuous manner not to exceed the width 
of the mark in a minimum 8 point font, “We self-certify compliance with”. 
With the words “We self-certify compliance with”, provide a link to: 
http://web.ita.doc.gov/safeharbor/shlist.nsf/webPages/safe+harbor+list
b. With the mark, provide a link to: www.export.gov/safeharbor
 8.  The mark must be removed from the organization’s website under the 
appropriate circumstances including, but not limited to: a. the organization 
withdraws from participation or is removed as a participant in the U.S.-EU 
Safe Harbor Framework; b. the organization fails to comply with a final 
ruling of a private sector dispute resolution body, a self-regulatory body, 
or government body, as applicable, in connection with allegations of Safe 
Harbor non-compliance; c. the organization fails to renew its commitment 
to the Framework in a reasonable time and in accordance with the 
reaffirmation requirements; d. the organization is acquired by another 
entity that either is not in the Framework or chooses to opt-out of the 
program; or e. the organization ceases commercial operations.
 9.  Failure to comply with these instructions may result in enforcement of the 
certification mark through an action for infringement of the mark, and/or 
a referral to the Federal Trade Commission for investigation of an unfair or 
deceptive trade practice under section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act.
54 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification
Appendix E: Safe Harbor Certification mark
On July 31, 2008, the International Trade Administration 
(ITA) announced that it developed a certification mark 
for the U.S.-European Union (EU) Safe Harbor Framework. 
The mark may be used by companies on their websites to 
signify that they have self-certified compliance with the 
provisions of the Safe Harbor Framework. 
The Safe Harbor Framework facilitates secure, uninterrupted transfers of per-
sonal information that support billions of dollars in trade from the EU to the 
United States. By displaying this certification mark, participating companies 
can more easily illustrate their commitment to ensuring that EU citizens’ data 
is secure, which is critical to the U.S.-EU trade relationship. 
In order to display the certification mark, participating U.S. companies must 
follow specific instructions developed by ITA. Only those organizations that 
have self-certified and are listed on ITA’s official Safe Harbor Program list will 
be allowed to use the mark in an appropriate manner. Continued use of the 
mark is contingent on companies maintaining their status in the program.
Instructions for Self-Certified Organizations on the use of the Safe Harbor 
Certification mark
Congratulations on your self-certification to the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework. 
Your self-certification is valid for one year and is renewable annually on or be-
fore your anniversary of enrolling in the Framework. In order to continue to take 
advantage of the benefits that self-certification affords, you must maintain your 
official filing and inform the Department of any changes in the scope of your or-
ganization’s activities within the European Union. The Department provides its 
“Safe Harbor” certification mark (referred to hereafter as “mark”) to those organi-
zations that maintain their “current” status by self-certifying their practices in an 
official, annual filing with the Department. This mark must be used in accordance 
with the following instructions.
Safe Harbor Certification Mark Instructions
 1.  The mark is a visual manifestation of the commitment your organization 
makes when it self-certifies that it will comply with the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor 
Framework. 
 2.  Your organization may announce its self-certification in a press release and in-
clude the mark as evidence that it has met the self-certification requirements 
established by the Department for the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework.
56 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 57
EU Directive – The EU Directive was adopted in 1995 and became effective in 
1998 and protects individuals’ privacy and personal data use. The Directive 
recognizes the European view that privacy is a fundamental human right, and 
establishes a general comprehensive legal framework that is aimed at protect-
ing individuals and promoting individual choice regarding the processing of 
personal data. The Directive imposes an onerous set of requirements on any 
person that collects or processes data pertaining to individuals in their per-
sonal or professional capacity. It is based on a set of data protection principles, 
which include the legitimate basis, purpose limitation, data quality, propor-
tionality, and transparency principles, data security and confidentiality, data 
subjects’ rights of access, rectification, deletion, and objection, restrictions on 
onwards transfers, additional protection where special categories of data and 
direct marketing are involved, and a prohibition on automated individual de-
cisions. The Directive applies to all sectors of industry, from financial institu-
tions to consumer goods companies, and from list brokers to any employer. 
The Directive’s key provisions impose serious restrictions on personal data 
processing, grant individual rights to “data subjects,” and set forth specific pro-
cedural obligations, including notification to national authority. The Directive 
has been supplemented by additional directives including a specific provision 
for the telecommunications sector (2002/58) as well as for e-commerce. 
European Economic Area (EEA) – An economic region that includes the Euro-
pean Union (EU) plus Iceland, Norway, and Liechtenstein – the latter are not 
official members of the European Union but are closely linked by economic 
relationship.
European Union (EU) – The European Union (EU) is an organization of Euro-
pean countries dedicated to increasing economic integration and strength-
ening cooperation among its members. The European Union was involved in 
the development of the Safe Harbor Principles that affect data flows from the 
European Union into the United States. As of July 2008, the member states 
include: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Esto-
nia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithu-
ania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) – The U.S. Federal Trade Commission enforces 
a variety of federal antitrust and consumer protection laws, including the Safe 
Harbor Principles. The Commission seeks to ensure that the nation’s markets 
function competitively, and are vigorous, efficient, and free of undue restric-
tions. The Commission also works to enhance the smooth operation of the 
marketplace by eliminating acts or practices that are unfair or deceptive.
Appendix F: Glossary *
Access – The ability to view personal information held by an organization – this 
ability may be complemented by an ability to update or correct the information. 
Access defines the intersection of identity and data; that is, who can do what to 
which data.  
Adequacy – As used in EU Data Protection Directive, adequacy refers to the 
existence of a legal regime in another country that provides sufficient protec-
tion for personal information. In other words, a country will be deemed “ad-
equate” if its laws afford individuals rights that are similar to those afforded by 
the EU Data Protection Directive. If a country offers adequate protection, then 
data transfers from the European Economic Area (EEA) to that country may 
occur without any further limitation – provided that the processing meets 
the other provisions of the Directive. This concept has been expanded to en-
compass other types of data transfer mechanisms. For example, the U.S. Safe 
Harbor provides an adequate level of protection, so companies that are in the 
Safe Harbor may transfer data from the EU to the US. Similarly, the EU Model 
Contracts provide an adequate level of protection, so data may be transferred 
from the EU to any country, if the recipient has executed a Model Contract.
Choice – An individual’s ability to determine whether or how personal infor-
mation collected from him or her may be used or disclosed by the entity that 
collected the information. Also: The ability of an individual to limit certain 
uses of his or her personal information. For example, an individual may have 
choice about whether to permit a company to contact the individual or share 
the individual’s data with third parties. 
Data commissioner – Government official that runs a data protection office 
and that is charged with enforcing a country’s data protection laws.
Data protection authority – See data commissioner. 
Data subject – Term used in some data protection litigation to describe an 
individual who is the subject of a personal data record. 
Directive – See EU Directive
Dispute resolution – The response to a valid complaint or grievance, or the 
action taken to correct faulty information, or to make amends for harm or 
inconvenience caused to an individual.
EU Data Protection Directive – Several directives deal with personal data usage, 
but the most important is the general policy approved by the European Commis-
sion in 1995 (95/46/EC) which protects individuals’ privacy and personal data use. 
58 The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor Guide to Self-Certification  U.S. Department of Commerce 59
Safe Harbor – The European Commission’s Directive on Data Protection (The 
EU Directive) prohibits the transfer of personal data to non-European Union 
nations that do not meet the European “adequacy” standard for privacy pro-
tection. While the United States and the European Union share the goal of pri-
vacy protection, the United States uses a sectoral approach that relies on a mix 
of legislation, regulation, and self-regulation, while the European Union relies 
on comprehensive legislation that requires creation of government data pro-
tection agencies, registration of databases with those agencies, and, in some 
instances, approval before data processing may begin. As a result of these dif-
ferent privacy approaches, the directive could have significantly hampered the 
ability of U.S. companies to engage in many trans-Atlantic transactions.
In order to bridge these different privacy approaches and provide a stream-
lined means for U.S. organizations to comply with the directive, the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce and the European Commission developed a “Safe 
Harbor” framework. The Safe Harbor – approved by the EU in 2001 – is an 
important way for U.S. companies to avoid interruptions in business deal-
ings with the EU or prosecution by European authorities under European  
privacy laws.
Certifying to the Safe Harbor assures that EU organizations know that a com-
pany provides adequate privacy protection, as defined by the directive. From 
a U.S. perspective, Safe Harbor is a self-regulatory regime that is only avail-
able to companies that are subject to the enforcement authority of the U.S. 
Federal Trade Commission or the U.S. Department of Transportation. Compa-
nies that are outside the jurisdiction of these two agencies are not eligible to  
join Safe Harbor.
*Definitions for this Glossary are used by permission from the: 
IAPP Certified Information Privacy Professional Training Course Book
circlecopyrt 2007 by the International Association of Privacy Professionals
https://www.privacyassociation.org/
Member state – In EU documents, this term refers to a country that is a full 
member of the European Union.  As of July 2008, the member states include: 
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fin-
land, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Lux-
embourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom.
Notice – A written description of an entity’s practices with respect to its collec-
tion, use and disclosure of personal information. A private notice typically in-
cludes a description of what personal information the entity collects, how the 
entity uses the information, with whom it shares the information, whether 
the information is secured, and whether an individual has any choices as to 
how the entity uses the information. 
Opt-in - A consumer’s expression of affirmative consent based upon a specific 
act of the consumer.
Opt-out – A consumer’s exercise of choice through an affirmative request that 
a particular use of disclosure of data not occur. 
Personal Data – Any and all data that relates to an identifiable individual. See 
EU Directive. 
Personal information – Any information that (i) relates to an individual and 
(ii) identifies or can be used to identify the individual. Such information may 
include an individual’s name, postal address, e-mail address, telephone num-
ber, Social Security number, or other unique identifier. 
Privacy – The appropriate use of personal information under the circumstanc-
es. What is appropriate will depend on context, law, and the individual’s ex-
pectations; also, the right of an individual to control the collection, use, and 
disclosure of personal information.
Privacy policy – An organization’s standard pertaining to the user information 
it collects and what is done with the information after it is collected. 
Privacy seal program – Self-regulatory regimes that certify compliance with a 
set of standards of privacy protection. Websites display the program’s seal to 
indicate that they adhere to these standards. 
Privacy statement – An organization’s communication regarding its privacy 
policies, such as what personal information is collected, how it will be used, 
with whom it will be shared, and whether one has the option to exercise con-
trol over how one’s information is used. Privacy statements are frequently 
posted on Websites. 

U.
S.
?
EU
SAFE
 HARBOR
 FR
A
ME
WORK
?
GUIDE 
T
O SELF-
CER
TIFIC
A
TION 
?
M
AR
CH 2009
U.S. Department of Commerce
U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework
1401 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Room 2003
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: 202.482.5023  ?   Fax: 202.482.5522  ?   www.export.gov/safeharbor
