 1
ANNEXES TO THE IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
Annex 1: Current EU Legal instruments on data protection 
Annex 2: Evaluation of the implementation of the Data Protection Directive 
Annex 3: Data protection in the areas of police and judicial co-operation in criminal 
matters  
Annex 4: Summary of replies to the public consultation on the Commission's 
Communication on a Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection in the 
European Union 
Annex 5: Detailed Analysis of Impacts 
Annex 6: Detailed Assessment of Impacts of the Introduction of Data Protection Officers 
(DPOs) and Data Protection Impact Assessments (DPIAs) 
Annex 7: Analysis of the Impacts of Policy Options on Fundamental Rights 
Annex 8: Consultation of SMEs 
Annex 9: Calculation of Administrative Costs in the Baseline Scenario and Preferred 
Option 
Annex 10: Impacts of the preferred option on competitiveness  
 2
 
ANNEX 1 
 
CURRENT EU LEGAL INSTRUMENTS FOR THE PROTECTION  
OF PERSONAL DATA 
 
1.  EU CHARTER OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS  
Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union enshrines the 
fundamental right to the protection of personal data of every individual in a legally binding 
nature, and defines the basic principles for the protection of personal data. 
2. DATA PROTECTION DIRECTIVE 95/46/EC  
Directive 95/46/EC1 is the central legislative instrument in the protection of personal data 
in Europe. Directive 95/46/EC is the legislative basis for two long-standing aims of European 
integration: the Internal Market (in this case the free movement of personal data) and the 
protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals. In the Directive, both 
objectives are equally important.  
Directive 95/46 was a milestone in the history of the protection of personal data as a 
fundamental right, along the path paved by Council of Europe Convention 108 of 28 January 
1981. Legislation at EU level was essential because differences in the way Member States 
approached this issue impeded the free flow of personal data among the Member States. Its 
legal base was thus Article 100a/Article 95 of the EC Treaty. 
The Directive applies to and has been implemented by all 27 EU Member States, as well as 
the three EEA/ EFTA States: Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway. Switzerland has also 
implemented the Directive for the Schengen relevant areas. In line with the Copenhagen 
criteria, all candidate countries are committed to transposing Directive 95/46/EC by the time 
of accession. 
The Directive develops and specifies data protection principles in order to achieve 
harmonisation throughout the EU. The principles of the protection of the rights and freedoms 
of individuals vis-à-vis processing activities, notably the right to privacy, which are contained 
in Directive 95/46, give substance to and amplify those contained in the Convention (and its 
additional protocol on cross border data flows and independent supervisory authorities, added 
only in 2001 after the implementation of the Directive). The Directive stipulates general rules 
on the lawfulness of the processing of personal data and the rights of the people whose data 
are processed (‘data subjects’). The Directive also provides that at least one independent 
supervisory authority in each Member State shall be responsible for monitoring its 
implementation. The Directive also regulates transfers of personal data to third countries: in 
general, personal data cannot be exchanged with a third country unless the latter guarantees an 
adequate level of protection. The Directive is technologically neutral, and its principles and 
provisions are sufficiently general, therefore its rules can continue to apply appropriately to 
new technologies and new situations.  
                                                 
1  Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, OJ 1995 L 
281/31. 
 3
 
The Directive applies to both the public and the private sectors. Directive 95/46/EC does not 
apply to the processing of personal data in the course of police and judicial cooperation in 
criminal matters. 
3. "E-PRIVACY" DIRECTIVE 2002/58/EC 
Directive 2002/58/EC2 particularises and complements Directive 95/46/EC with respect to the 
processing of personal data in the electronic communication sector, ensuring the free 
movement of such data and of electronic communication equipment and services in the 
Union. It has been partially amended by the Data Retention Directive 2006/24/EC.  
This Directive has also been recently amended by Directive 2009/136/EC3 as part of the 
overall review of the regulatory framework for electronic communications, introducing in 
particular a mandatory personal data breach notification.  
This Directive, also, applies to and has been implemented by all 27 EU Member States as 
well as the three EEA EFTA States Island, Liechtenstein and Norway.  
4. DATA PROTECTION REGULATION (EC) NO 45/2001 
Combining the relevant features of Directives 95/46/EC and 2002/58/EC, Regulation 
No 45/20014 regroups the rights of the data subjects and the obligations of those responsible 
for the processing into one legal instrument for the Institutions and bodies of the EU. It also 
establishes the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) as an independent supervisory 
authority for the EU institutions (see also Decision 1247/2002). The legal basis was Article 
286 EC.  
With the entry into force of Article 16 TFEU (replacing the former Article 286 EC), the 
scope of application of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 extends automatically to all data 
processing activities of Union institutions within the scope of Union law. The latter now 
contains both former third pillar and second pillar activities. Consequently, there is no legal 
need to formally update Regulation 45/2001 at present, but this cannot be excluded in the 
future, for legal certainty. 
5. PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA IN THE AREA OF THE COMMON FOREIGN AND 
SECURITY POLICY 
Currently there is no specific EU legislation for the protection of personal data for Member 
States in the area covered by the common foreign and security policy. Specific rules for the 
                                                 
2  Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the 
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive 
on privacy and electronic communications, OJ 2002 L 201/ 37. 
3  Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 amending 
Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users’ rights relating to electronic communications networks 
and services, Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy 
in the electronic communications sector and Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 on cooperation between 
national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection laws, OJ 2009 L 337/11. 
4  Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the 
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and 
bodies and on the free movement of such data; OJ 2001 L 008/1. 
 4
protection of personal data may be laid down according to the newly introduced Article 39 
TEU for Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) issues, but for Member States only. 
The Commission applies, for all of its activities, the provisions of Regulation (EC) 45/2001. 
For all measures that fall within the sphere of the Union, such as Union action implementing 
restrictive measures/sanctions, Member States apply the national provisions resulting from 
implementing the Directive 95/46/EC. 
6. PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA IN POLICE AND JUDICIAL COOPERATION IN 
CRIMINAL MATTERS 
For the area of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters alone, the current data 
protection framework in the EU can only be described as a patchwork that is, consisting of 
different rights and obligations for Member States and individuals, and creating several data 
protection supervisory authorities5. Several instruments exist with specific data protection 
regimes or with data protection clauses. 
Since 2008 Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA6 aims at creating an EU general 
legislative framework for the protection of personal data in police and judicial cooperation in 
criminal matters. Implementation of the Framework Decision was due in November 2010. It 
applies fully to the UK and Ireland, as well as Iceland, Norway and Switzerland, because it is 
a development of the Schengen acquis. It does not, however, replace the rules applicable to 
Europol, Eurojust, Schengen and the Customs Information System, and it does not create a 
single independent supervisory authority. This Framework Decision does not affect the 
Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic 
Processing of Personal Data, and the Additional Protocol to that Convention of 8 November 
20017, which therefore remains relevant for some EU instruments relating to police and 
judicial cooperation which contain specific data protection regimes or data protection clauses. 
Protocol 36 on Transitional provisions annexed to the Treaty of Lisbon provides that in the 
case of the existing former third pillar acquis, the principle is the preservation of all legal acts 
so long as they are not repealed, annulled or amended (Article 9).  
The Commission has no infringement powers in the case of former framework decisions 
(Article 10). Also, the powers of the Court of Justice are to remain the same with respect to 
those acts in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters which 
were adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. These transitional measures 
are to cease to have effect five years after the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. 
Declaration 50 concerning Article 10 of the Protocol 36 attached to the treaties invites the 
institutions, within their respective powers, to seek to adopt, in appropriate cases and as far as 
possible within the five-year transitional period, legal acts amending or replacing existing 
third pillar acts.  
 
                                                 
5  For example: the DPAs at national level, the EDPS, and the Joint Supervisory Board for Europol, Customs, 
Schengen (with a common secretariat), plus Eurojust and its Supervisory Body. 
6  Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA of 27 November 2008 on the protection of personal data 
processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters; OJ 2008 L 350/60. 
7  See below under 2.7 
 5
 
ANNEX 2 
 
EVALUATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
 THE DATA PROTECTION DIRECTIVE  
 
1. CONTEXT OF THE EVALUATION  
The Commission's reports on the implementation of the Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC8 
found in 20039 and in 200710 that the Directive did not manage to fully achieve its internal 
market policy objective, or to remove differences in the level of data protection actually 
afforded in the Member States. Enforcement was also identified as an area where 
improvement was needed.  
This evaluation focuses on the implementation of key provisions of the Data Protection 
Directive since then. It is carried out in the context of the reform of the current acquis on the 
protection of personal data in the European Union. To address the question whether existing 
EU data protection legislation can still fully and effectively cope with the challenges, posed 
particularly by globalisation and new technologies, the Commission launched a review of the 
current legal framework on data protection, starting with a high-level conference in May 
2009.  
The conclusions in the present document are based on findings in this review as regards the 
implementation of Directive 95/46, including the analysis of Member States' legislation 
transposing the Directive into national law, on the basis of studies11, of opinions of the Article 
29 Working Party,12 and of a survey launched by the Commission in relation to certain 
aspects of the Directive, to which 22 Member States responded. 
                                                 
8 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24.10.1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, 
23.11.1995, p. 31). 
9  Report from the Commission - First Report on the implementation of the Data Protection Directive 
(95/46/EC), 15.5.2003, COM (2003)265final.  
10  Communication on the follow-up of the Work programme for a better implementation of the Data Protection 
Directive, 7.3.2007, COM (2007)87final. 
11 Comparative study on different approaches to new privacy challenges, particularly in the light of 
technological developments, January 2010  
(http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/studies/new_privacy_challenges/final_report_en.pdf);   
 European Agency on Fundamental Rights, Data Protection in the European Union: the role of National Data 
Protection Authorities – Strengthening the fundamental rights architecture in the EU II, 2010, available at 
http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/attachments/Data-protection_en.pdf; 
Study on the economic benefits of privacy enhancing technologies, London Economics, July 2010 
(http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/studies/final_report_pets_16_07_10_en.pdf);  
Study for an impact assessment for the future legal framework for personal data protection by GHK 
Consulting Ltd., February 2011, launched by the Commission to support the IA process; 
Case law on the circumstances in which IP addresses are considered personal data, by time.lex CVBA, 
October 2010; Allocation and Use of IP Addresses, by Vigilio Consult, 2010; Privacy and Trust in the 
Ubiquitous Information Society, by Fraunhofer ISI et al., March 2009; Legal Analysis of a Single Market 
for the Information Society: New rules for a new age?, by DLA piper, 2009. 
12  Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data, established 
by Article 29 of the Directive; the opinions of the Working Party are accessible under: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/workinggroup/wpdocs/2011_en.htm. 
 6
2. KEY PROVISIONS OF DIRECTIVE 95/46/EC 
2.1. Definitions and concepts 
2.1.1.  The concept of "personal data" - Article 2(a) 
The concept of “personal data” is one of the key concepts in the protection of individuals by 
the current EU data protection instruments and triggers the application of the obligations 
incumbent upon data controllers and data processors. The definition of "personal data" covers 
all information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person, either directly or 
indirectly. This deliberate technique to define "personal data" used by the legislator in 1995 
has the advantage of providing a high degree of flexibility and the possibility to adapt to 
various situations and future developments affecting fundamental rights. However, although 
the definition of "personal data" and "data subjects" are almost literally transposed by the 
majority of the Member States into their national laws13, this broad and flexible definition 
leads to some diversity in the practical application of these provisions. In particular, the issue 
of objects and items ("things") linked to individuals, such as IP addresses, unique RFID-
numbers, digital pictures, geo-location data and telephone numbers, has been dealt with 
differently among Member States.  
 
For instance IP addresses, which identify computers on networks, are considered as personal 
data by some Member States, while by others they may be qualified as such only under 
certain circumstances.14 Only a few Member States have taken a clear regulatory approach 
assessing the status of IP addresses. Austria considers IP addresses as being personal data in 
the Austrian Security Policy Act. Laws in Cyprus, Italy and Luxembourg suggest the same, 
but within the context of electronic communications. According to the Bulgarian and Estonian 
Electronic Communications Acts, only a combined set of data which includes IP addresses 
constitutes, as a whole, personal data. Hence, public authorities in charge of Network and 
Information Security and Critical Information Infrastructure Protection as well as Computer 
Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs), Internet Service Providers and the security 
industry have expressed concerns about legal uncertainty regarding the handling and 
exchange of IP addresses and e-mail addresses across organisations and borders to ensure the 
overall security of networks and information systems (e.g. to mitigate spam, botnets or 
Distributed Denial of Service attacks). 
 
In the absence of clear regulatory provisions, many national Data Protection Authorities 
(DPAs) provided guidelines and opinions on the matter. Some of them took the view that the 
processing of IP addresses does not fall within the scope of legislation implementing the 
Directive, as long as the addresses themselves are not linked to individuals or to PCs of 
individuals (e.g. Belgium, UK). The majority of DPAs point to the fact that sophisticated 
means allow, in most cases, the re-identification of users, and consider, in their opinions on 
this issue, that IP addresses themselves are personal data (e.g. Denmark, France, Germany, 
                                                 
13   National laws of all Member State replicate the definitions of "personal data" and "data subjects" including, 
in some cases, the elements of recital 26 of the Directive13 (e.g. France, Slovenia, Spain) or other minor 
amendments. 
14 Case law on the circumstances in which IP addresses are considered personal data, by time.lex CVBA, 
October 2010; 
 
 7
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Spain). Estonian, Slovenian and Swedish 
DPAs state that IP addresses are considered as personal data in combination with other data, 
which could allow linking a dynamic or static IP address to an individual subscriber. The 
Austrian DPA recognised dynamic IP addresses (which are assigned automatically, as 
opposed to static IP addresses) as personal data.   
 
National courts tend to consider IP data as personal data (e.g. in Austria, France, Germany, 
Italy, Poland, Spain, Sweden, UK); only few courts found that IP addresses were not personal 
data since they allowed identification of a computer but not its user (e.g. some courts in 
France15, Ireland16). ECJ case law on the confidentiality of electronic communications17 does 
not refer to the status of IP addresses.  
 
Another major area of divergent interpretation relates to the circumstances in which data 
subjects can be said to be "identifiable", if they have been made "anonymous", so that data 
can no longer be related to the individual, or "pseudonymised", where data can only be linked 
to the individual if one is in possession of a decoding "key". In this regard, recital 26 of the 
Directive states that "the principles of protection shall not apply to data rendered anonymous 
in such a way that the data subject is no longer identifiable". However, the assessment 
whether the data allow re-identification depends on the circumstances, available means and 
technological development. In several Member States, DPAs consider encoded or 
pseudonymised data as identifiable – and thus as personal data – in relation to the actors who 
have means (the "key") for re-identifying the data, but not in relation to other persons or 
entities (e.g. Austria, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, UK). In 
other Member States all data which can be linked to an individual are regarded as "personal", 
even if the data are processed by someone who has no means for such re-identification (e.g. 
Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden). However, DPAs in those Member States 
are generally less demanding with regard to the processing of data that are not immediately 
identifiable, taking into account the likelihood of the data subject being identified as well as 
the nature of the data.  
 
Digital pictures of properties held in a database are considered, in the Netherlands for 
example, as personal data, if used for valuation or taxation purposes. In Sweden, telephone 
numbers were considered as personal data, but in one case, under the previous law, subject to 
the condition that not more than one specific person used the phone.18 There are also cases 
where the notion of "personal information" referring to professional activities as personal data 
was challenged.  
 
Responding to these divergent approaches, the Article 29 Working Party issued an opinion on 
the concept of "personal data"19, clarifying, particularly, the elements of "any information", 
"relating to", and "natural person", and pointing to recital 26 of the Directive as an essential 
                                                 
15    SCPP / Marie-Thérèse O. TGI Montauban, 9 March 2007; Anthony G./SCPP, Appeal Court of Paris, 13th 
Ch., sect. B, 27 April 2007; Sacem v. Cyrille Saminadin, Supreme Court, Criminar Ch., 13 January 2009. 
16     EMI records & Ors-v-Eircom Ltd, 2010, IEHC 108 
17   E.g. C-275/06, Productores de Musica de Espana (Promusicae) v. Telefonica de Espana SAU, 29.1.2008. C-
557/07, LSG-Gesellschaft v. Tele2Telecommunications GmbH, 19.2.2009. 
18  See also the definition of "traffic data" in Article 2(b) of the ePrivacy Directive 2002/58/EC, OJ L 201, 
31.7.2002, p. 37. 
19  Opinion 4/2007 on the concept of personal data (WP 136). 
 8
means for interpretation. On the specific issue whether IP addresses are to be considered as 
"personal data", the Working Party concluded that IP addresses should be considered as 
personal data particularly in those cases where they were processed for the purpose of 
identifying the users of the computer. This position is referred to by DPAs in several Member 
States (e.g. Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Poland, and Romania).  
 
Although the present definition of "personal data" encounters divergent applications in 
Members States in some situations, especially as regards things linked to individuals, it would 
seem counterproductive to change the definition of personal data.  Specific issues such as IP 
addresses and geo-location data should be tackled on the basis of this proven concept, taking 
into account – as said in recital 26 of the Directive - of "all the means likely reasonably to be 
used either by the controller or by any other person to identify the said person". Detailed 
references to specific technologies would jeopardise the proven technological neutrality of the 
Directive and risk gaps when technology advances. 
 
2.1.2. The concepts of data "controller" and "processor" - Article 2(d) and (e) 
The concepts of data controller and data processor play a crucial role in the application of the 
Directive, particularly for determining the responsibility for compliance with data protection 
rules, the exercise of the rights of data subjects, the applicable national law and effective 
enforcement by the Data Protection Authorities. The definition of data "controller" in the 
Directive refers to the natural or legal person or body which - alone or jointly with others - 
determines the purposes and means of processing. "Processor" is defined as the natural or 
legal person or body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller. However, 
apart from rules relating to confidentiality or security of processing and for the controller's 
responsibilities as regards the data subject's rights, the Directive contains no comprehensive 
or detailed set of obligations and responsibilities for controllers and processors.  
 
A number of national laws (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, France, Luxembourg, Netherlands and 
Sweden) closely follow the definition of the "controller". Other laws provide for some 
variations: for instance, focusing on the determination of the "purposes" of the processing, 
either without any reference to the "means" (e.g. Austria) or with reference to the "contents 
and use" of processing instead of the "means" (e.g. Spain). Irish law defines the controller as 
the person who determines the "scope and manner" of the processing, without referring to the 
purposes, while Italian law provides a detailed definition of the controller as "either the entity 
as a whole or the department or peripheral unit having fully autonomous decision-making 
powers in respect of purposes and mechanisms", and also expressly "related to security 
matters". German law defines the controller as "any person or body which collects, processes 
or uses personal data for itself, or which commissions others to do the same".  
  
The definition of "processor" has been implemented by most national laws. Austrian law 
provides that if a processor carries out processing "other than as instructed", he/she has to be 
regarded as the controller in respect of that processing. Some Member States do not provide a 
definition of "processor", but cover this processing in definitions of "third party" or 
"recipient". German law covers in more detail processing "on behalf of the controller" and "on 
instructions".  
 
These divergences run counter the objective of the Directive to ensure the free flow of 
personal data within the internal market. This is true for a large number of sectors and 
contexts, e.g. when processing personal data in the employment context or for public health 
 9
purposes. Different interpretations and a lack of clarity of certain aspects of these concepts 
has led to uncertainties with regard to responsibility and liability of controllers, co-controllers 
and processors, the actual or legal capacity to control processing, and the scope of applicable 
national laws, causing negative effects on the effectiveness of data protection.  
 
The lack of harmonisation is one of the main recurring problems raised by private 
stakeholders, especially economic operators, since it is an additional cost and administrative 
burden for them. This is particularly the case for data controllers established in several 
Member States, who are obliged to comply with the requirements and practices in each of the 
countries where they are established. Moreover, the divergence in the implementation of the 
Directive by Member States creates legal uncertainty not only for data controllers but also for 
data subjects, creating the risk of distorting the equivalent level of protection that the 
Directive is supposed to achieve and ensure. Also the provision on liability in the Directive 
(Article 23) focuses on the controller, without addressing the liability of the processor.  
 
The lack of harmonisation is especially pertinent where more than one controller and/or 
processor are involved in processing operations located in different Member States that apply 
different rules for controllers and/or processors. In practice, due to the complexity of the 
environment in which data controllers and processors operate, and particularly due to a 
growing tendency towards organisational differentiation in both the private and the public 
sectors as well as the impact of globalisation and new technologies, these concepts became 
increasingly complex. Sometimes numerous controllers and/or processors are involved in the 
same processing operations. An example for this is behavioural advertising, where publishers 
rent website-advertising space and network providers collect and exchange information on 
users. Such "joint controllership" is covered by the definition of the "controller" ("jointly with 
others"). However, in such cases there is a need to clarify the sphere of responsibilities, 
including the duty of informing the data subject that his/her data are accessible by others and 
conditions of access to personal data. In case the controller is located outside the EU, 
additional problems arise in view of the determination and enforcement of the applicable law 
(see section 2.3) and the transfer of data to third countries (see section 2.11).  
 
These problems are amplified in the context of "cloud computing", whereby software, shared 
resources and information are on remote servers ("in the cloud"). In the context of cloud 
computing, a cloud user can delegate to a cloud operator the supply of storage, infrastructure, 
software and security. The internet makes it much easier for data controllers and processors 
established outside the EU to provide such services from a distance and to process personal 
data in the online environment. It is often difficult to determine the location of personal data, 
which is frequently replicated on all continents in order to improve its accessibility, and to 
enforce data protection rules particularly in situations where the controller targets services to 
EU residents but has no establishment or representative in the EU. This may involve the loss 
of individuals' control over their potentially sensitive information when they store their data 
with programs hosted on someone else's hardware. Cloud providers usually consider 
themselves as data processors; however, whether the cloud provider is to be regarded as a 
controller or processor depends on the circumstances. Due to the current limitations of 
encryption technologies, it is expected that the cloud provider will very often have full access 
to most personal data controlled by its customers. Also, the concrete implementation of the 
rights of the individuals, such as modification and deletion of the personal data, is frequently 
operated by the cloud provider's subcontractors. It is, therefore, important to clarify which 
controller in such situations is responsible for ensuring that the data subjects using online 
 10
services can exercise their rights, independently from the place where the processing occurs, 
whether in a European or an international cloud.  
 
On 16 February 2010 the Working Party adopted an opinion on the concepts of "controller" 
and "processor"20, in which it assessed these concepts in detail, concluding that clarification 
of these concepts was called for in order to ensure effective application and compliance in 
practice, but also found that the current distinction between controllers and processors was 
relevant and workable.  
 
Although the definitions and concepts of "controller" and "processor" remain themselves 
relevant, they need to be clarified and detailed in specific provisions as regards the 
obligations, responsibilities and liability of both controllers and processors. Harmonised rules 
on the responsibilities of data controllers and processors, including the obligation to 
demonstrate compliance with their obligations, would foster legal certainty. Including in the 
case of more than one controller and/or processors being involved, it must be clear for the 
data subject whom to address to in order to exercise his or her rights. 
 
 
2.1.3. The concept of "consent" - Article 2(h) 
The definition of "the data subject's consent" in the Directive builds on the elements of "any 
freely given specific and informed indication" of the data subject's wishes signifying the 
agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him/her. Whereas national law in 
most Member States reflects these elements, several Member States require the consent to be 
"unambiguous" (e.g. Portugal, Spain, Sweden), given "expressly" (e.g. Cyprus) or "explicit" 
(e.g. Greece, Luxembourg). In some Member States, the consent for data processing must be, 
in principle, in writing (Germany, Italy). Poland requires a "declaration of will", which 
"cannot be alleged or presumed on the basis of the declaration of will of other content", but 
does not particularise the elements "free, specific and informed". On the contrary, some other 
Member States (e.g. France, Ireland, Romania and UK) do not provide a definition of 
"consent" in their national data protection laws. In practice, this leaves room for considering, 
in certain circumstances, that "consent" to the processing of (non-sensitive) data is implied, as 
it is the case in the UK. In some cases it is not even clear what would constitute freely given, 
specific and informed consent to data processing.  
 
These different approaches among the national systems – ranging from written consent to 
implied consent – create considerable discrepancies, which are relevant for ensuring 
"informed consent" of the data subject (see section 2.7). This situation is particularly 
problematic in cross-border situations, including the internet. "Consent" obtained under the 
law of one country and valid under that law, could be regarded as insufficient for subsequent 
processing in another Member State because it might not meet (additional) requirements of 
that law for considering "consent" as a valid legal basis. The scope of application of "consent" 
also needs clarification, particularly in relation to the requirement of "free consent" in specific 
situations where there is an imbalance between the position of the data subject and the 
controller, in particular in the employment context, due to the relationship of the 
subordination of the employee to the employer, or in the public sector. The opinions issued by 
the Article 29 Working Party cover specific situations such as cross-border data flows,21 
                                                 
20  Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of "controller" and "processor" (WP 169). 
21  Working Document on a Common Interpretation of Article 26(1) of the Directive, 25.11.2005 (WP 114).  
 11
employment22, schools,23 and the medical sector24, but do not solve the problem of divergent 
national approaches. 
 
These discrepancies are brought into sharper focus in the online environment, where 
individuals are generally less aware of or certain about their rights, and are hence less capable 
of giving informed and meaningful consent to data processing. A critical question in this 
respect is whether the settings (default or otherwise) of most commercially available web 
browsers can actually be considered to deliver the informed consent within the meaning of the 
Directive. In the light of this debate and the discrepancies between Member States' national 
rules, the Article 29 Working Party issued, in June 2010, an opinion on behavioural 
advertising25, in which it states that "the settings of currently available browsers and opt-out 
mechanisms only deliver consent in very limited circumstances" and calls on "advertising 
network providers to create prior opt-in mechanisms requiring an affirmative action by the 
data subjects indicating their willingness to receive cookies or similar devices and the 
subsequent monitoring of their surfing behaviour for the purposes of serving tailored 
advertising."  
 
In view of the divergent approaches among national laws and the consequences deriving from 
these, there is a need to clarify and determine in more detail the conditions and rules on 
consent, in order to guarantee informed consent and to ensure that individuals are fully aware 
that they are consenting to a specific data processing.  
 
2.2. "Household exemption" - Article 3(2), second indent - and Freedom of 
information - Article 9 
2.2.1. The 'household exemption' 
Member States, businesses and individuals see online services as creating one of the main 
challenges to personal data protection. The internet makes processing easier and consequently 
vastly increases the audience and the volume of data processed; this also results in the 
increased risks for data subjects when using such applications. Surveys show that most 
European users feel uneasy when transmitting their personal data over the internet, but only a 
minority of users said they used tools and technologies that increased data security.26  
 
In this context, one issue of major concern is the application of the Directive to online social 
network services (SNS). While the social network providers are controllers (since they 
determine the purposes and the means of processing personal information on their online 
communication platforms) the situation is less clear as regards the users of such platforms. 
The Directive does not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in the 
context of a purely personal or household activity. However, the role of the users may go 
                                                 
22    Opinion 8/2001, 13.11.2001 (WP 48). 
23  Opinion 2/2009, 11.2.2009 (WP 160). 
24  Working Document on the processing of personal data relating to health in electronic health records, 
15.2.2007 (WP 131). 
25  Opinion 2/2010, 22.6.2010 (WP 171).  
26 See Flash Eurobarometer No 225 – Data Protection in the European Union:  
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_225_en.pdf.  
 12
beyond such context. Personal data are often retained and disclosed without the person 
concerning being informed and/or having given his/her consent on this.  
 
ECJ case law27 - referring to the "correspondence and the holding of records of addresses"28 – 
has clarified the scope of this exemption. The court ruled that the exemption does not apply 
"with the processing of personal data consisting in publication on the internet so that those 
data are made accessible to an indefinite number of people". This means that users of social 
networks, disclosing personal data of other individuals, act as controllers and therefore cannot 
rely on the complete exemption from the scope of the Directive, even if the processing relates 
to purely non-economic, charitable and religious purposes. On the other hand, the Court 
clarified that the information appearing on a computer in a third country does not constitute a 
transfer of data by the users themselves, and also, that Member States are not prevented from 
extending the scope of their national law to areas not included in the scope of the Directive.29  
 
In practice, in most Member States the Data Protection Authorities focus on the responsibility 
of the service providers, without dealing with the question of whether users of such sites, who 
make personal data available to others, become subject to the law as controllers. In France, 
the Data Protection Authority excludes bloggers from the notification requirement and 
advises internet users who create a personal website for a circle of family or friends to impose 
access restrictions, to inform the individuals concerned, to disseminate the data to third parties 
only within the context of private activities, to give the data subject the opportunity to object 
to it and to ensure a proportional retention period. By contrast, in the UK, the Data Protection 
Authority has not even addressed the responsibilities of the SNS providers and has restricted 
itself entirely to issuing guidance to individual users, without addressing the issues that arise 
on the processing of information about other individuals.  
 
In view of these serious discrepancies between the Member States, the Article 29 Working 
Party issued, in June 2009, an opinion on social networking30. It clarified that the "household 
exemption" applies to users who operate within a purely personal sphere, contacting people as 
part of the management of their personal, family or household affairs. The opinion advocates 
robust security and privacy-friendly default settings and focuses on the obligations of 
providers in its recommendations, including the obligation to inform data subjects on the 
different purposes for which they process personal data, and to take particular care with 
regard to the processing of the personal data of minors. It recommends that information on 
other individuals should only be uploaded by a SNS user with that individual's consent.  
 
2.2.2. Freedom of expression 
According to the Directive, should it be necessary to reconcile the right to privacy with the 
rules governing freedom of expression, Member States shall provide for exemptions or 
derogations in the national laws for the processing of personal data for solely journalistic 
purposes, artistic or literary expression (Article 9). However, the Directive does not provide 
guidance on what is "necessary" in order to reconcile the right to privacy with the rules 
                                                 
27  ECJ, Case C-101/01, Bodil Lindqvist, 6.11.2003, and the Satamedia Case C-73/07, Tietosuojavaltuutettu v. 
Satakunnan Markkinapörssi Oy, Satamedia Oy, 16.12.2008, para. 44. 
28  Cf. recital 12 of the Directive. 
29  ECJ, Case C-101/01, Bodil Lindqvist, 6.11.2003. 
30  Opinion 5/2009, 12.6.2009 (WP 163). 
 13
governing freedom of expression. As regards this exemption, also, the ECJ held that 
processing of personal data must be considered as "solely for journalistic purposes" if the sole 
object of those activities is the disclosure of information, opinions or ideas to the public, and 
that also personal data files which contain solely, and in unaltered form, material that has 
already been published in the media, fall within the scope of application of the Directive.31 In 
its case law, the ECJ stressed the margin for manoeuvre of Member States to determine how, 
in any particular case, a fair balance between freedom of expression and privacy should be 
achieved, provided that the right to freedom of expression and freedom to receive and impart 
information is taken into account, and that any such national decision would have to be 
proportionate in relation to those rights.32  
 
In practice, this provision is applied quite differently in the Member States. The need to 
extend the exception to everyone and not just to journalists, artists or writers is recognised 
particularly clearly by Denmark and Sweden, where the data protection law does not apply to 
the extent of violating the freedom of expression. On the other hand, Luxembourg's law 
contains the caveat that "without prejudice to the rules in the legislation on mass 
communication media", thus focussing on the mass media rather than on non-journalists. It 
provides specific rules on informing the data subject, on the right of access, on transfers to 
third countries and – to the extent that they relate to matters "manifestly made public by the 
data subject" – on the processing of sensitive data. Italian law provides that data on private 
matters may only be reported if there is a "substantial public interest", unless the data subject 
has made the data public, or if their publication is justified in view of the public conduct of 
the data subject.  
 
Austrian law focuses on whether it is "necessary to fulfil the information-providing task of 
media companies, media service providers and their employees". Spanish law does not refer 
to freedom of expression, but contains certain provisions relaxing its rules with regard to the 
processing of data derived from "publicly accessible sources". In France, there are a number 
of exemptions for the media and for literary or artistic expression, explicitly stressing that 
these exemptions are without prejudice to the rules in civil and criminal law of defamation. In 
Germany, the "media privilege" does not exempt the media from the data protection 
requirements, but recognises that the interests of data subjects and controllers must be 
balanced differently in this context. In other Member States (e.g. Belgium, Netherlands, 
Portugal), the exemptions relate to a more limited range of provisions. Belgian law spells out 
that issues such as the protection of sources, or whether the normal rules would hamper the 
collection of information, should be taken into account. The UK and the Irish law impose the 
requirement that the controller "reasonably believes" that the processing is "in the public 
interest", thus leaving, in practice, the emphasis on self-regulatory control of the press. In 
Greece, the law only grants an exemption from the obligation to inform data subjects, and 
then only if the data subjects are "public figures". Apart from these widely different 
approaches in national legislation, in several Member States "non-professionals" such as SNS 
users and "bloggers" are not covered by exemptions in relation to freedom of expression, 
despite the fact that their "user-generated" information will, to a significant extent, provide 
information to the public.  
 
                                                 
31  ECJ, Case C-73/07, Satamedia , 16.12.2008. 
32  ECJ, Case C-101/01, Bodil Lindqvist, 6.11.2003. 
 14
As regards the disclosure of information to the public or to third parties, the ECJ33 has made it 
clear that no automatic priority can be conferred to the objective of transparency over the right 
of personal data, and that the disclosure of documents involving personal data would require 
demonstrating the necessity for their disclosure on compelling legitimate grounds. 
 
Both the "household exemptions" and exemptions in relation to freedom of expression create 
increasing uncertainty in particular as regards the processing of data by users of social 
networks. The limitations of "purely personal or household activities" and the application of 
data protection rules for disclosing to the public information, opinions or ideas, in relation to 
the freedom of expression should be clarified. 
 
2.3. The applicable law - Article 4 
The Commission’s first report on the implementation of the Data Protection Directive34 in 
2003 already highlighted the fact that the provisions on applicable law were “deficient in 
several cases, with the result that the kind of conflicts of law Article 4 seeks to avoid could 
arise”. The situation has not improved since then, as a result of which it is not always clear to 
data controllers and data protection supervisory authorities which law is applicable where data 
processing in several Member States is involved.  
 
The linking of the applicable law to any establishment of the controller leads to the 
consequence that the same controller has to comply with different national laws which apply 
for each of its establishments. This is particularly the case for data controllers established in 
several Member States and obliged to comply with the – sometimes divergent – requirements 
and practices in each of these Member States. Moreover, the divergence in the 
implementation of the Directive by Member States creates legal uncertainty as to which legal 
obligations apply. This is not only relevant for data controllers, but also for data subjects, 
creating the risk of distorting the equivalent level of protection that the Directive is supposed 
to achieve and ensure. This may lead to situations of different levels of protection, e.g. when 
Member States follow different interpretations of the "household exemption", or of the 
concept of freedom of expression. Data Protection Authorities frequently provide guidance to 
controllers on how to comply with their law on the internet, but rarely on the question of 
when their law applies to these activities. Generally, they do not seek to apply their national 
laws to processing operations of controllers established in other Member States (see point 
2.12.6).  
 
Uncertainties exist also on the issue as to which national law applies to the processing 
activities of controllers located outside the EU, in particular when the data controller is not 
established in the EU but provides its services to EU residents in several Member States. The 
application of the Directives for such controllers is linked to the "use of equipment, automated 
or otherwise, situated on the territory" of the Member State, unless used for purposes of 
transit. However, already the notion of "equipment" itself is not clear and widely interpreted 
in the sense of "means". This is in particular relevant given the growing complexity due to 
globalisation and technological developments: data controllers increasingly operate in several 
Member States and jurisdictions, providing services and assistance around the clock. The 
                                                 
33  Joint cases C-92/09 and C-93/09, Volker und Markus Schecke GbR, Hartmut Eifert v. Land Hessen, 
9.11.2010; C-28/08, Commission v. The Bavarian Lager Co Ltd, 29.6.2010. 
34 Report from the Commission - First Report on the implementation of the Data Protection Directive 
(95/46/EC) - COM(2003)265. 
 15
internet makes it much easier for data controllers established outside the EU to provide 
services from a distance and to process personal data in the online environment, and it is often 
difficult to determine the location of personal data and of equipment used at any given time 
(e.g., in “cloud computing” applications and services). Whereas, for example, in most 
Member States, the Data Protection Authorities regard the use of "cookies" – in line with the 
opinion of the Article 29 Working Party35 - as sufficient to bring the processing of data by a 
non-EU controller within the scope of their laws, investigating violations on the internet and 
enforcement of the data protection rules becomes difficult where servers are located outside 
the EU. In some Member States (e.g. in France), the views of national courts and Data 
Protection Authorities differ from each other. The "transit" criterion is applied by several 
Member States (including Belgium, Finland, Ireland, UK) only to the Member State in 
question, or without clarifying whether this means transit through their territory or transit 
through the EU (e.g. Greece, Netherlands and Spain).  
 
Divergent approaches exist also in relation to the obligation to appoint a representative for a 
non-EU based controller. In many Member States it is not known how many controllers not 
established on EU territory and making use of equipment situated on their territory have 
designated a representative, as required by Article 4(2) of the Directive. Thus this obligation 
to designate a representative is hardly enforced in practice. This situation creates the serious 
risk of depriving individuals of the protection to which they are entitled under the EU Charter 
of Fundamental Rights and EU data protection legislation.  
 
In December 2010, the Article 29 Working Party issued an opinion36 aimed at clarifying the 
concept of applicable law. It notes, inter alia, that several Member States' laws could become 
applicable when establishments of the same controller are located in several Member States. 
The "use of equipment" provision should apply in those cases where there is no establishment 
on EU territory, or where the processing is not carried out in the context of such 
establishment. The opinion recommends simplifying the rules for determining applicable law, 
and applying the 'country of origin principle' on the basis of comprehensive harmonisation of 
national legislation, so that the same law applies to all establishments of the controller, 
regardless of the location of the establishments. Where the controller is established outside the 
EU, it recommends, inter alia, to developing 'targeting criteria' when processing is targeted at 
individuals in the EU, and to apply the equipment criterion in a limited form. 
 
Uncertainties and different approaches as regards applicable law demonstrate the need for a 
revision of the provisions on applicable law, in order to improve legal certainty and ultimately 
provide for the same degree of protection of EU data subjects, regardless of the geographic 
location of the data controller. 
 
2.4. Data Protection Principles - Article 6 
The data protection principles are in general considered, both by Member States and 
stakeholders, as being sound and valid. However, the wording of the purpose-limitation 
principle leaves it open to divergent application, ranging from "reasonable expectations" of 
                                                 
35  Opinion 1/2008, 4.8.2008 (WP 148). 
36  Opinion 8/2010, 16.12.2010 (WP 179).  
 
 16
the data subject, to "fairness" or the application of various "balance tests". In some countries, 
the principle is subject to exemptions, particularly for the public sector. In others, purposes 
are sometimes defined in excessively broad terms. The rules concerning the change of 
purpose for the processing of non-sensitive personal data without the consent of the data 
subject, including for research and statistical purposes, vary considerably, as they do as 
regards the requirement of safeguards. Some Member States do not provide any safeguards, 
and others only minimal, insufficient safeguards.  
Also, the vague terminology that personal data must be "not excessive" in relation to the 
purposes for which they are collected and/or further processed, leaves room for divergent 
interpretations and does not guarantee data minimisation, i.e. limiting the extent of 
processing to the minimum necessary in relation to its purposes. This is relevant e.g. in view 
of the collection and storage period for personal data or of privacy-friendly default settings 
which could enhance data protection. Currently, default settings are often overly complex and 
not user friendly; also, the method of changing them can be unclear or imprecise.  
 
While the Directive requires that personal data be processed "fairly" and provides for certain 
information requirements, it does not explicitly express the "principle of transparency" in the 
sense that the data must be processed in a manner that is transparent to the data subject. The 
specific inclusion of such a principle would emphasise that transparency is a fundamental 
condition for enabling individuals to exercise control over their own data and to ensure 
effective protection of their personal data, which could serve as a basis for improved 
information requirements (see section 2.7.).  
 
Another issue is the need to clarify the role of data controllers in ensuring compliance with 
these principles, as required by Article 6(2) of the Directive. The Working Party concluded, in 
its opinion of 13 July 2010 on the principle of accountability37, that there is a need to 
strengthen this concept by requiring data controllers to implement appropriate and effective 
measures to ensure that the principles and obligations of the Directive are complied with, and 
demonstrate this to the Data Protection Authorities upon request. Such a principle on the 
comprehensive responsibility of data controllers would need to be clarified and accompanied 
by the elaboration of detailed provisions, specifying the concepts of controllers and 
processors. 
 
While the key data protection principles have proven to still be valid and sound, the principles 
of data minimisation, transparency should be added, as well as the principle of comprehensive 
responsibility of the data controller to ensure and demonstrate compliance with data 
protection rules. Clarification is also needed particularly on the conditions for the change of 
purpose of the processing of personal data, which are collected for another purpose, and on 
the processing of personal data for statistical and research purposes. 
 
2.5. Lawfulness of processing - Article 7 
In several Member States the criteria set out in Article 7(a) to (f) of the Directive are 
transposed as alternative grounds for lawful processing on equal footing (e.g. in Belgium, 
Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Sweden). In Austria, Germany 
and Spain, consent and processing based on a law or to fulfil a legal obligation are given 
primary status, the other criteria being seen as exceptions. In other countries (including the 
                                                 
37  Opinion 3/2010, 13.7.2010 (WP 173). 
 17
Czech Republic, France, Greece and Portugal) processing on the basis of consent is the sole 
primary criterion. In Italy this is the case only for the private sector.  
As regards processing on the basis of consent, the legitimacy of processing depends on the 
concept of "consent", which is understood and applied differently from Member State to 
Member State (see point 2.1.3). Apart from that, uncertainties arise as to how far data 
processing in the public sector and other specific sectors, such as employment, may rely on 
the consent of the data subject. 
In relation to processing on the basis of a legal obligation, the ECJ38 and the European Court 
of Human Rights39 clarified the issue of whether such legal obligation might be justified by 
reasons of substantial public interest such as those laid down in Article 8 of the European 
Convention on Human Rights and the requirement of necessity and proportionality for this 
purpose. However, different standards in the quality of laws cause problems particularly in 
the cross-border context, both in the private and public sector. This may lead to the situation 
that the Member State in which the data are further processed does not meet the requirements 
of the law of the Member State in which the data are collected. Another uncertainty is whether 
the legal obligation or the public interest as a legal basis for processing is to be determined by 
the national law to which the controller is subject, or by the national law of any EU Member 
State, which might then require the data collection and disclosure by a controller residing in 
another Member State. As regards a third country requesting the transfer of data collected in a 
Member State, the Article 29 Working Party indicated that an obligation imposed by a third 
country's legal statute or regulation requiring a controller in a Member State to undergo 
processing activities cannot qualify as a legal obligation by virtue of which data processing in 
the EU would be made legitimate40.  
 
The implementation of the "balance of interest" criterion (Article 7(f)) differs substantially 
between Member States. In the UK it is largely left to controllers to conduct the assessment 
and to determine whether they can process personal data on this basis. In the Netherlands, the 
explanatory memorandum to the data protection law sets out guidance on what issues should 
be taken into account when applying this criterion. Given its vagueness, several Member 
States (including Belgium, Ireland and UK) have envisaged issuing further rules for the 
application of this criterion, but have not yet adopted such rules. DPAs have provided 
guidance in their opinions interpreting the law. In some countries, it is explicitly indicated that 
the balance test applies only to the private sector (e.g. Germany) or in cases specified by the 
Data Protection Authority (Italy) or on the basis of the permission of the national data 
protection supervisory authority in a specific case (Finland). Other countries (including 
Greece and Spain) impose stricter requirements on processing on the basis of this criterion. 
Thus, by its nature, this criterion gives the Member States latitude to adapt its application to 
specific situations.  
 
In view of divergent approaches in the Member States, the criteria on lawfulness of 
processing on the basis of consent, of a legal obligation and of the 'balance of interest' 
criterion need clarification and specification.   
                                                 
38  Joint cases C-92/09 and C-93/09, Volker und Markus Schecke GbR, Hartmut Eifert v. Land Hessen, 
9.11.2010; C-524/06, Heinz Huber v. Germany, 16.12.2008; C-139/01, Rechnungshof, Österreichischer 
Rundfunk et al., 20.5.2003. 
39  See e.g. S. & Marper v. UK, 4.12.2008 (Application Nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04). 
40   See Opinions 1/2006 and 2/2006 (WP 117 and 118). 
 18
 
2.6. Sensitive data - Article 8 
• The Directive is based on the premise that certain categories of personal data, as 
distinct from all other personal data, require extra protection and may be processed by private 
and public bodies only for specific purposes and under special conditions. Therefore, the 
Directive prohibits, as a general rule, the processing of exhaustively listed special categories 
of data, the so-called 'sensitive data', i.e. data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political 
opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, and the processing of 
data concerning health or sex life, unless under certain conditions and safeguards. Without 
qualifying them as such special categories of data, the Directive sets out that for data relating 
to offences, criminal convictions or security measures, Member States may provide specific 
safeguards. 
• When implementing this provision, some Member States go beyond the categories of 
"sensitive data" set out in the Directive and have added genetic data (e.g. Bulgaria, the Czech 
Republic, Estonia, Luxembourg, Portugal) and biometric data (e.g. the Czech Republic, 
Slovenia and Estonia). Portugal regards "private life" as sensitive data, Poland "party 
membership" (in addition to trade-union membership) and "addictions". Some Member States 
have also included data from the judiciary in their catalogue of special categories of personal 
data, for example information about previous convictions or criminal behaviour (e.g. Cyprus, 
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Slovenia, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland). On the other hand, 
some national laws do not include information on ethnic origin, political opinions or 
philosophical beliefs. Belgium provides a specific provision for health data in line with the 
Directive.  
 
Genetic data are not expressly mentioned by the Directive in the list of 'sensitive data'. 
However scientific progress made over recent years in the field of genetic research has given 
rise to new data protection issues in relation to genetic tests and more generally to the 
processing of genetic data. Genetic data show characteristics which make them unique. The 
judgement of the European Court of Human Rights, in S and Marper v United Kingdom41, 
stated that there could be little, if anything, more private to the individual than the knowledge 
of his genetic make-up42. The fact that some Member States have listed genetic data as 
‘sensitive data’ in their data protection law with associated restrictions and safeguards, 
whereas in most Member States the issue of the processing of genetic data is not regulated as 
such, leads to the consequence that an individual’s fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA 
profiles may be processed for different purposes from one Member State to another, with 
different data protection rules and standards applying.  
• Beyond sensitive data, France considers specific categories of treatments as “risky”. 
Such “risky treatments” include for instance genetic data, biometric data and information 
about criminal records. Processing such data is not prohibited as such but is subject to prior 
authorisation from the data protection supervisory authority. 
• Differences in the interpretation of the categories in the Directive may also be 
observed: e.g. "health data" may range from information about a simple cold to information 
                                                 
41  S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 4 December 2008, applications nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04. 
42   For a more detailed analysis, see the Article 29 Working Party “Working Document on Genetic Data” (WP 91). 
 19
about illnesses or disabilities. Furthermore, the term "racial origin" (in addition to "ethnic 
origin") is often differently understood. Photos and images of persons, such as those 
published on the Internet or taken by traffic monitoring or other surveillance cameras, are 
especially problematic, since they can reveal information about an individual's ethnic origin 
or health status. Finally, there are differences in applying certain categories of sensitive data 
in Member States, because the degree of sensitivity may be seen in one Member State 
differently than in another Member State, e.g. with regard to the category “trade-union 
membership”. 
 
As regards the exceptions from the general prohibition of processing 'sensitive data', even 
less harmonisation than for the categories of 'sensitive data' has been achieved. Member 
States have used their discretion in a different fashion with the result of significant differences 
in the implementation of Article 8 (2) – (5). Some Member States impose additional 
requirements for the processing of sensitive data. The Netherlands provides specific 
exemptions for each category of sensitive data. The UK provides specific exemptions and 
conditions for processing genetic data. France allows processing under additional conditions, 
if justified by the purpose of the processing. For the exception based on explicit consent, 
about half of the Member States (including Belgium, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain) require, as an additional condition, 
that the consent is given in writing. Some Member States stress, in addition to their general 
rules on consent, that the consent for processing sensitive data must not be obtained illegally 
or contrary to accepted moral values (Cyprus, Greece). Other Member States, such as Italy 
and Sweden, do not accept consent as a legitimate basis for processing sensitive data. 
• The provision on the processing of sensitive data for specified health-related 
purposes has been implemented by most Member States; in some with corresponding 
provisions, in others with either more stringent or less stringent conditions. For example, in 
Cyprus and Denmark this exception is restricted to health professionals only, whereas in the 
Czech Republic and in Slovakia the exception is extended also to health insurance. In the 
other Member States, which do not recognise such extension to insurance, processing for the 
purpose of health insurance contracts is normally based on the exception of explicit consent; 
this leads, for example, to the use of blanket declarations by insurance companies, which 
might be doubtful both as regards "informed" and "free" consent. DPAs noted the problems in 
national data protection with regard to the term "health professionals". In practice health data 
are processed for various purposes and it is often not clear who belongs to the category of 
health professionals or the group of persons obliged to comparable secrecy obligations. Nor 
are there currently explicit grounds under Article 8 of the Directive justifying the processing 
of sensitive personal data in case of injuries, when health data are transmitted by non-medical 
personnel, e.g. at schools. 
 
The possibility for Member States to add further exemptions for reasons of substantial public 
interest has led to a broad range of exceptions allowing for the processing of sensitive data for 
different purposes. These purposes are mostly related to public security (e.g. in Germany, 
Spain, UK), social security and welfare (e.g. Austria, Czech Republic, Ireland, Latvia, Spain), 
research and statistics (e.g. Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Malta, 
Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden), journalistic and artistic purposes (e.g. Belgium, Spain, 
UK), the administration of justice (e.g. Ireland, UK), the functioning of government (Ireland), 
protection of public health and fiscal control (Spain) and obligations under international law 
(Netherlands). Some national laws refer to regulations made for reasons of "substantial public 
interest" (Ireland) or, for certain categories of data, to the "general interest" (Spain). However, 
 20
in the national laws of several Member States provisions on suitable safeguards are missing. 
Consequently, the Article 29 Working Party noted a need to formulate more precisely the 
exception for the processing of sensitive data “for reasons of substantial public interest”.  
 
The provision on data relating to offences, criminal convictions or security measures is also 
transposed in various ways, partly by including it in the categories of "sensitive data" (e.g. 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Greece, Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain) or by a special legal 
framework (e.g. Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg), but in many Member 
States suitable safeguards are not provided. As far as these categories are included in the 
definition of sensitive data, this has consequences such as that explicit consent may serve as a 
legitimate basis for data processing.  
 
In many cases the provision on the notification of derogations from Article 8(1) of the 
Directive to the Commission has not been transposed. This is demonstrated by the fact that, 
for example, in 2009 the Commission received notifications of derogations only from four 
Member States (Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, UK). As in practice the obligation to notify 
is not always met by Member States it is difficult for the Commission to provide an EU-wide 
overview of those derogations. 
 
Only some Member States (including Bulgaria, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Latvia, Malta, 
Netherlands, Romania, and Sweden) have determined the conditions under which the 
national identity number can be transposed, with different basic approaches to the use of this 
identifier, ranging from a widespread exchange between public authorities to more restricted 
use. Some countries allow the use of such a number in the private sector, whereas others are 
restrictive in this regard.  
 
Divergent approaches about what categories of data are considered as being "sensitive data" 
and under what conditions such data may be processed call for an examination of the concept 
of sensitive data, including the categories and their possible extension e.g. on genetic data and 
for further harmonising the conditions under which such data may, exceptionally, be 
processed.  
 
2.7. Information to data subjects - Articles 10 and 11 
Articles 10 and 11 of the Directive oblige the controller or his representative to inform the 
data subject as to the identity of the controller, the purposes of the processing and to provide 
any further information "in so far as such further information is necessary". Despite the 
examples of such information listed in those provisions, this open wording leads to 
uncertainties whether such information might or might not be necessary in a specific situation. 
Moreover, the application of the information requirement itself is not always ensured on in 
practice. For example, a survey conducted by the Commission among Data Protection 
Authorities and Member States in the case of hotel registrations revealed that not in all 
Member States national law obliges hotels to inform travellers about the purposes of the 
processing of their personal data when completing hotel registration forms. Whereas such an 
obligation exists e.g. in Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, 
Luxembourg, Latvia, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, in other 
Member States the hotels are not required to provide such information (e.g. in Austria, 
Bulgaria, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Spain). Some Member States argued that the 
 21
information requirement is fulfilled by expressly laying down in the law the purposes of the 
registration as well as other information.43  
 
Despite being particularly relevant for individuals for exercising their rights, Articles 10 and 
11 currently do not require informing the data subject of the competent Data Protection 
Authority and its contact details nor do these provisions specify how long the data will be 
retained. Moreover, the information provided by the controller is often not easily accessible 
and difficult to understand. Especially in the online environment, quite often privacy notices 
are unclear, difficult to access, non-transparent44 and not always in full compliance with 
existing rules. A case where this might be so is online behavioural advertising, where both the 
proliferation of actors involved in the provision of behavioural advertising and the 
technological complexity of the practice make it difficult for an individual to know and 
understand if personal data are being collected, by whom, and for what purpose.  
 
Despite children deserving specific protection, as they may be less aware of risks, 
consequences, safeguards and rights in relation to the processing of personal data45, there are 
no specific requirements in the Directive. The lack of clear and understandable information of 
the data subjects also affects the validity of consent, which requires, as a fundamental 
condition, "informed consent" (see point 2.1.3 on the concept of consent). 
Data breaches, in particular of large companies’ customer databases, are increasing. Security 
failures may lead to harmful consequences for individuals, ranging from undesired spam to 
identity theft46. The recent revision of the e-Privacy Directive47 introduced a mandatory 
personal data breach notification, which covers, however, only the electronic communications 
sector. Given that risks of data breaches also exist in other sectors (e.g. the financial sector), 
the consultation carried out by the Commission in 2010-2011 confirmed the need to extend 
the information of data subjects to a general obligation of the controller to inform Data 
Protection Authorities and, in defined circumstances, also of data subjects when their data are 
accidentally or unlawfully destroyed, lost, altered, accessed by or disclosed to unauthorised 
persons.  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
43  Despite the Commission's request, the Article 29 Working Party did not include this issue in its Working 
Programme and thus has not provided an opinion so far. 
44 A Eurobarometer survey carried out in 2009 showed that about half of the respondents considered privacy 
notices in websites 'very' or 'quite unclear' (see Flash Eurobarometer No 282 :  
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_282_en.pdf). 
45 See the Safer Internet for Children qualitative study concerning 9-10 year old and 12-14 year old children, 
which showed that children tend to underestimate risks linked to the use of Internet and minimise the 
consequences of their risky behaviour (available at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/sip/surveys/qualitative/index_en.htm). 
46 Interesting figures on recent data breaches and losses can be found at: http://datalossdb.org (data not 
verified).   
47  Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12.7.2002 concerning the 
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive 
on privacy and electronic communications), OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37, as amended by Directive 
2009/136/EC, OJ L 337, 18.12.2009, p. 11. 
 22
To ensure that individuals are well informed in a transparent way, data controllers should be 
obliged to inform data subjects about how and by whom their data are collected and 
processed, for what reasons, for how long and what their rights are if they want to access, 
rectify or delete their data. This information should be provided in an easily accessible and 
understandable way, using clear and plain language. Data controllers should be obliged to 
notify data breaches to Data Protection Authorities and, under defined circumstances, also to 
data subjects.  
 
2.8. Rights of the data subjects - Article 12  
The Directive provides for a set of rights for individuals. These include individuals' rights vis-
à-vis those processing their personal data such as the right to access, rectify, block and delete 
their own data. These rights are, however, expressed in general terms and the way they can 
actually be exercised is not clearly specified. Nor does the Directive impose any deadlines for 
responding to data subjects’ requests or any indication of the level of fees for exercising the 
rights to rectification, erasure and blocking; the condition "without excessive delay or 
expense" applies only to the right of access. 
 
All Member States guarantee the right of the data subject to access his/her own data, 
although also in that respect there are differences in the implementation in national law. In 
some countries (e.g. Greece, Spain and Sweden) the controllers are required to inform the data 
subject, on request, about the source of the data, the processor or of any developments in 
processing since the last access request. In the Netherlands the law stipulates that the 
controller must contact other individuals if their data are involved and decide, in the light of 
the response, whether to disclose this data. UK follows a similar approach, but with an 
exemption concerning information given in confidence to the controller for certain purposes, 
including employment. In Germany the right of access is extended to data held in 
unstructured files, if the data controller, e.g. a credit reference agency, processes the data 
professionally for the purpose of providing the data to others. Other countries provide specific 
rules relating to such purposes. Austrian law provides that, on the data subject's request, the 
data may not be deleted for a period of four months. ECJ case law clarified that the Directive 
requires Member States to ensure the right of access, not only in respect of the present, but 
also in respect of the past, and to provide for access to that information on the basis of a fair 
balance between the interests of the data subject and the burden for the controller.48  
 
All Member States guarantee in their laws the right of data subjects to obtain rectification of 
personal data relating to them, but also with some differences. In Greece, this right extends to 
all contested processing, whereas in other Member States this is linked to incomplete or 
incorrect data. The laws in Austria and Germany provide that documents retained for 
historical purposes need not be rectified, but the data subject has the right to have comments 
added. Austrian law stipulates also that regularly issued compilations, such as address lists, 
should be corrected in the subsequent regular issue.  
 
The right to request the deletion of data is provided by the Directive, but in practice it is 
difficult for an individual to enforce this right vis-à-vis the data controller. Recent reported 
                                                 
48  C-553/07, College van burgemeester en wethouders van Rotterdam v. M.E.E. Rijkeboer, 7.5.2009, European 
Court reports 2009 Page I-03889 
 23
cases about people seeking to have their data deleted from a social network are a telling 
example of the practical difficulty to exercise this right especially in the online environment49.  
 
It is also not always clear who owns the personal data supplied by a user to a service provider. 
The Directive provides no explicit right for the individual to withdraw his/her own personal 
data (e.g. his/her photos or a list of friends) from an online-service, so that the individual may 
transfer data to another application or service.  
 
The way in which these rights can be exercised differs from country to country, so that 
exercising them is actually easier in some Member States than in others. All Member States 
except Spain give data subjects the right to obtain an actual copy of the data. In some Member 
States (e.g. Austria, Finland, UK) the law expressly provides that, if the data subject agrees, 
the controller may, as an alternative, offer access on its premises or online rather than by hard 
copy. In other Member States this alternative is at the discretion of the controllers, at least 
when a copy in permanent form is not feasible or would involve a disproportionate effort (e.g. 
Ireland). In France, access to data on criminal convictions, "penalty points" on a driving 
licence and certain medical data is restricted to the inspection of the data, without providing 
the right to obtain a hard copy. In some Member States individuals have to pay a fee to access 
their data, while in others it is free of charge50. Some Member States impose a deadline on 
data controllers to respond to access requests, while others do not.  
 
Clarification and enhancement of the individual's control over his or her "own data" is needed, 
including the right to have the data deleted or to retrieve data from online service providers. 
Also, the conditions and modalities for the actual exercise of the rights of access, rectification 
and deletion of data need to be improved and harmonised, taking into account electronic 
means which facilitate access to their data and the exercise of these rights.  
  
2.9. Notification of processing and Data Protection Officers - Article 18  
2.9.1. Notification 
Article 18 of the Directive imposes a general notification requirement, but leaves 
considerable room for manoeuvre to Member States to determine exemptions from and 
simplifications of notification requirements and the procedures to be followed. Accordingly, 
Member States adopt very different approaches. Some national laws (e.g. Bulgaria, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Spain, Romania, and UK) require all 
controllers to notify. In several Member States the controllers are required to notify when the 
processing is carried out by automated means (e.g. France, Malta, Netherlands, and Sweden). 
Other national laws require hardly any controllers to notify, except in limited circumstances 
on the basis of a positive list (e.g. Austria, Finland).  
 
Moreover, the details and the use of the information provided by the notifications vary from 
Member State to Member State. The most frequent use of notifications is for inspections and 
audits, and for contacting the controllers. Most DPAs consider the purposes of the processing 
and data categories to be the most useful information, whereas the description of security 
procedures is considered as less useful for their purposes. Some DPAs use the notifications 
                                                 
49  See http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703396604576087573944344348.html.  
50  EB 2011. 
 24
for prior checking; some only use it to contact organisations in cases of a complaint, for 
enforcement purposes.  
 
In several Member States, Data Protection Authorities collect notification fees, whereas 
others do not. The fees collected for a single notification range from about 23 EUR to about 
599 EUR. In some Member States the fee varies depending on: whether the data controller is 
a natural or legal person; if processing is in the public or private sector; the numbers of staff 
and turnover; or by the method of notification, i.e. paper or online (e.g. Belgium). Some 
Member States charge a fee for amendments to the notification. In other Member States the 
fees are a one-off charge or an annual charge. Among those DPAs who collect fees, most 
receive income to their budget; this ranges from just over 1.2 % of their budget up to 100%, 
i.e. providing their complete budget (UK DPA). In few Member States the fees are paid into 
general revenue and do not benefit the DPA's budget.  
 
There is general consensus amongst data controllers that the current general obligation to 
notify all data processing operations to the Data Protection Authorities is a rather 
cumbersome obligation which does not provide, in itself, any real added value for the 
protection of individuals' personal data, but rather creates an additional administrative and 
financial burden. This is particularly the case, as a consequence of the rules on the applicable 
law, where a controller is established in several Member States and has to comply with 
divergent notification systems.  
 
According to the Article 29 Working Party's Advice paper on notification, a public register 
held by a DPA is no longer the best and most appropriate way for individuals to understand 
what an organisation is doing with their personal data, and who to contact when things go 
wrong. 
 
2.9.2. Data Protection Officers 
Most Member States made use of the possibility to exempt from the notification requirement 
in case that the controller ensures internal control of data processing operations by appointing 
a Data Protection Officer (DPO). However, only the national laws of about one third of the 
Member States (including France, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Luxembourg, 
Malta, Netherlands, Poland and Slovakia) contain specific provisions on the expertise or the 
independence of the DPO regarding the exercise of his/her functions.  
While the appointment of a DPO is optional for the controller in other Member States, in 
Germany the appointment of a DPO is mandatory: for the public sector and – with a specified 
threshold of, in principle, ten employees permanently employed in the automatic processing – 
for the private sector. This does not necessarily lead to the recruitment of additional staff; 
often the assignment is given as an additional task to an existing staff member where the DPO 
function does not require a full-time, dedicated staff member. Other controllers outsource this 
task to external DPOs which provide services to various clients.  
Existing studies point to the fact that larger corporations, especially multinationals, usually 
already have appointed data protection officers. The same is true for many public data 
controllers in a number of Member States. The Article 29 Working Party noted that the 
successful experience of the mandatory introduction of Data Protection Officers in Germany 
abolished not only the centralised system of notification and public register, but contributed 
 25
also to the development of sector-specific best practices in data processing and protection.51 
This has been confirmed by stakeholders who expressed strong support for such concept, seen 
as a key element to demonstrate "accountability". 
 
Given the different approaches of Member States to the notification requirements and on the 
exemptions there from, and the administrative burden for operators in the internal market to 
comply with different rules and concepts, a revision of the current notification system is 
needed.  Harmonised conditions and standards are also needed for Data Protection Officers. 
 
2.10. Remedies and Sanctions - Articles 22 and 24 
2.10.1. Remedies 
All Member States guarantee, as a fundamental principle of the rule of law, the right to seek 
redress and corrective action through the courts. Data subjects are therefore entitled by 
ordinary administrative or civil law to go to court. In some Member States, data protection 
law either creates a special tort, or adds such a special right to the general law. The forum and 
the procedures are also determined by the ordinary court procedural law, However, under the 
applicable rules in the Directive, the courts may have to apply the substantial law of the 
country in which the controller is located.  
 
The substantial law differs to a certain extent from Member State to Member State, but in 
principle, the applicable administrative or civil law provides, in line with the Directive, that 
the controller is liable for compensation, unless he/she can prove that he/she is not 
responsible for the event causing the damage. In Ireland, under certain conditions, there is 
some lessening of the controller's burden of proof in view of alleged inaccuracy. UK law is 
more restrictive concerning non-material damage, for which compensation can only be 
awarded if material damage has also been proved. Belgium, Italy and Greece give data 
subjects the option of settling disputes either through the courts or by lodging a complaint to 
the Data Protection Authority in a quasi-judicial procedure.  
 
Despite the fact that many cases where an individual is affected by an infringement of data 
protection rules also affect a considerable number of other individuals in a similar situation, in 
many Member States judicial remedies, while available, are very rarely pursued in practice. 
This seems to be related to a general reluctance to bring an action to court, often related to the 
lack of information and the financial risk for the individual, when he/she is obliged to bear the 
costs of an unsuccessful claim for a judicial remedy, or when the damage is limited, e.g. in the 
case of unsolicited mails. Whereas the Directive spells out that each supervisory authority 
shall hear claims also when lodged by an association representing the individual, such 
possibility that associations represent data subjects in court cases is not provided by the 
Directive. On the other hand, stakeholders expressed reluctance as regards a 'class action' 
style procedure, fearing that this would increase the cost of services. 
 
                                                 
51  Report on the obligation to notify the national supervisory authorities, the best use of exceptions and 
simplification and the role of data protection officers in the European Union, 18.1.2005 (WP 106). 
 26
2.10.2. Sanctions 
The Directive obliges Member States to "lay down the sanctions to be imposed in case of 
infringement of the provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive", but does not detail the 
categories of sanctions or whether and, if so, what sanctions could be imposed by Data 
Protection Authorities or by other authorities or by the courts. Accordingly, the 
implementation of this general provision by the individual Member States has given rise to 
significant variations. In most Member States, both the DPAs and the judicial authorities have 
the power to impose sanctions, in others the sanctioning power is only for judicial authorities. 
Administrative fines are imposed by the DPAs in most Member States, but not in all (e.g. not 
in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Lithuania, Hungary and UK). Criminal sanctions have been 
imposed by judicial authorities in most Member States, but not in e.g. Bulgaria, the Czech 
Republic, Spain and Latvia. Hungary does not provide for administrative or criminal 
sanctions for the violation of data protection rules at all, but merely establishes liability under 
civil law. Slovakia in addition to administrative fines introduced disciplinary fines which may 
be imposed by the DPA. 
The degree of precision of the infringements which are subject to administrative sanctions 
diverges considerably between the countries. Some countries define the infringements in 
general terms, for instance 'processing of personal data in violation of the Data Protection 
Law' (e.g. Lithuania). Others enumerate long and very detailed lists of infringements, such as: 
failure to specify the purpose, means or manner of processing; processing of inaccurate 
personal data; collecting or processing of personal data in a scope or manner which does not 
correspond to the specified purpose; preservation of personal data for a period longer than 
necessary for the purpose of processing; processing of personal data without the necessary 
consent of data subject; failure to provide the data subject with information in the scope or in 
the manner provided by law; refusal to provide the data subject with the requested 
information; failure to adopt or implement measures for ensuring security of personal data 
processing; failure to fulfil the notification obligation (e.g. Czech Republic).  
Administrative fines in most Member States are established by specifying the minimum and 
maximum amount of money, while some others also make a reference to the percentage of 
gross turnover for the latest financial year in case the data controller is a legal entity (e.g. 
France). The upper limits for violating data protection laws range from €290 in Lithuania up 
to €120,000 in Italy, €300,000 in Germany and €601,000 in Spain. Some Member States 
differentiate the fines according to the type of the data controller, distinguishing natural and 
legal persons (e.g. Estonia, Czech Republic, France, Portugal), whether there is a 
repetitiveness of the offence or not (e.g. France, Lithuania), or have specific provisions to take 
into account negligence or intent (e.g. Poland, Portugal). In a few Member States the attempt 
to commit an offence is subject to penalty (e.g. Austria).  
 
Criminal sanctions are not imposed in all Member States (e.g. not in Bulgaria, Czech 
Republic, Latvia). In almost two thirds of the Member States detention has been imposed for 
serious violations of the data protection rules. The maximum period for imprisonment ranges 
from 4 months (e.g. Denmark and Portugal), one year (e.g. Austria) and two years (e.g. 
Germany, Sweden) up to three years (Spain and Poland). Several Member States do not 
impose criminal sanctions at all. The amount of criminal fines also differs significantly 
between Member States.  
 
 
 
 27
In a number of Member States the level of fines is seen as too low. Fines are imposed too 
infrequently to have a dissuasive effect, or because supervisory bodies have not developed a 
practice of imposing them. In some countries prosecutions and sanctions for violation of data 
protection law are extremely limited.  
 
In order to facilitate the application of remedies, the right to bring an action in court might be 
extended to civil society associations representing data subjects. There is also the need for 
strengthening the existing provisions on sanctions, including by explicitly obliging the 
Member States to impose criminal sanctions in cases of serious data protection violations. 
 
2.11. Data transfers to third countries – Articles 25 and 26 
2.11.1. Adequacy 
Article 25 provides the principles for the transfer of personal data on the basis of an adequacy 
decision, either on the basis of national law or by the Commission.52 However, the condition 
that the third country must provide an adequate level of protection to the data being 
transferred is implemented by Member States in different ways. Some allow the data 
controller itself to conduct the adequacy check, while others reserve it for national authorities, 
in particular the DPAs. This leads to divergent approaches and uncertainties on the 
interpretation of "adequate level of "protection", and varying interpretations of this concept 
between Member States, the DPAs and data controllers for declaring that the level of 
protection of a third country is adequate for the purposes of transfers to that country.  
As regards the Commission's adequacy decisions, the effect of such unilateral recognition by 
the Commission that a given third country ensures an adequate level of data protection is to 
allow the free flow of personal data from EU Members States to that third country. The 
Commission may unilaterally launch the procedure with a view of assessing a third country's 
data protection legislation. In some cases, the Commission has adopted partial adequacy 
findings covering not all but only specific transfers of personal data to a particular third 
country.53 
In the course of its adequacy findings the Commission has encountered various failings in the 
data protection system of third countries, for example, failure on the part of public authorities 
to respect data subject's rights to privacy and the lack of independent data protection 
institutions. 
At the same time, adequacy findings constitute a real opportunity for the Commission to 
engage in dialogue with third countries, promoting an EU compatible data protection model. 
Indeed, in today's world, characterised by constant and rapid development of new 
technologies where international data flows take place easily and quickly, traditional 
measures might not ensure sufficient protection of EU individuals.  
Furthermore, the Commission's adequacy decisions are perceived by some third countries as a 
means to promote their strategy for a digital economy and a modern information society. 
These countries consider that adequacy decisions will allow them to become actively involved 
                                                 
52  See CRIDS (University of Namur), Assessment of the application of Article 25 of Directive 95/46, July 
2011. 
53  See for the Commission decisions on the adequacy of third countries' data protection: 
       http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/thridcountries/ 
 28
in international flows of personal data and they will thus become internationally recognised as 
offering an adequate infrastructure and adequate means for processing personal data received 
from the rest of the world.  
Nevertheless, current practice has shown its limits. Apart from the fact that adequacy findings 
involve a complex, lengthy and detailed exercise, Commission adequacy decisions are 
accorded a "direct effect" in only a minority of Member States. In most cases there are 
preliminary legislative and administrative formalities before such decisions can take effect. 
Depending on the Member State concerned, Commission decisions must be ratified 
legislatively, notified by the ministry to the national data protection supervisory authority, 
adopted by the supervisory authority, or notified in advance to, and authorised by, the 
supervisory authority.  
 
2.11.2. Standard contractual clauses 
International transfers may also take place to a third country which does not offer an adequate 
level of protection where the controller adduces adequate safeguards, particularly by means of 
standard contractual clauses, which are included in contracts that allow data transfers from a 
data controller established in the EU to data controllers and processors in third countries. The 
Commission standard contractual clauses were updated in February 201054, to cover 
subsequent sub-processing activities and provide a single contractual framework for all 
processing activities related to a given transfer.  
Contractual clauses are seen as a useful instrument for international transfers involving a 
limited number of organisations or companies. However, these are also implemented 
differently. In some Member States, the DPA still needs to authorise the transfer, whereas in 
other Member States such authorisation is not required. 
 
2.11.3. Binding Corporate Rules (BCRs) 
The use of "Binding Corporate Rules" (BCRs), i.e. internal rules followed by a multinational 
corporation for transfers of personal data between the groups of companies belonging to the 
same multinational corporation, has been developed without being explicitly mentioned by 
the Directive.55 Data Protection Authorities in 16 Member States (Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, 
Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, UK) and three EEA countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway) 
have agreed on a mutual recognition procedure aimed at speeding up the procedure of 
analysis and approval of BCR so as to ensure that they provide the necessary data protection 
safeguards. This procedure, which has been in place since 2008 and in which one of those 
DPAs acts as lead authority in each case, has accelerated the adoption of BCRs, on average, 
from 18 months previously to less than six months.  
However, the use of BCRs also differs. Apart from the fact that not all DPAs participate in 
this mutual recognition scheme, several Member States still require an authorisation for the 
use of BCRs even though they have been approved by DPAs of other Member States. The 
adoption and authorisation of BCRs therefore remains complex and time-consuming. 
                                                 
54  Commission Decision 2010/87/EU of 5.2.2010, OJ L 39, 12.2.2010, p.5. 
55   BCRs have been developed as a matter of practice by data protection authorities and by the WP29 on the basis of  
    an extensive interpretation of Article 25(2) of the Directive. - See the overview on BCR: 
        http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/binding_rules/index_en.htm. 
 29
Considerable time is often necessary for the dialogue between the multinationals concerned 
and the lead DPAs, as well as to allow the companies to present modified proposals, since this 
requires the regular involvement of the company's board.  
While welcoming the approach of the BCRs and pointing to its increased significance, 
stakeholders in the private sector consider that the implementation of BCRs remains too 
lengthy, particularly due to the fact that they are a complex instrument which must address 
several issues, and that Data Protection Authorities have often no sufficient resources to 
approve BCRs promptly. This has limited the number of companies using this tool56 and 
discouraged several other companies, potentially keen on using them57. Economic 
stakeholders also expressed uncertainties about the notion of 'group of companies' and the 
lack of the inclusion of processors in the application of BCRs, and stressed the need to lay 
down legal rules on BCRs and to improve and simplify the "mutual recognition procedure". 
Given divergent approaches and complex and lengthy procedures, there is a need to improve 
and streamline the current procedures for international data transfers, including providing a 
clear legal basis for "Binding Corporate Rules. The adequacy procedure should also be 
clarified, particularly as regards the criteria and requirements for assessing the level of data 
protection in a third country. 
 
2.12. National Data Protection Authorities and enforcement - Article 28 
2.12.1. 'Complete independence' of the National Data Protection Authorities - Article 28(1)  
The requirement of "complete independence" has been clarified in a recent ECJ ruling58, 
which stresses particularly that independence implies a decision-making power independent 
of any direct or indirect external influence on the supervisory authority, precluding not only 
any influence exercised by the supervised bodies, but also any directions or any other external 
influence, whether direct or indirect, which could call into question the performance by those 
authorities of their task. The Court ruled therefore that making a DPA subject to state scrutiny 
is not in compliance with the requirement of "complete independence".  
 
In Greece and Portugal an independent supervisory authority is explicitly established even by 
the Constitution. In other Member States DPAs are provided with a distinct legal personality 
(e.g. Malta, Spain) and by the power to bring an action in the Constitutional Court (e.g. 
Slovenia). In a number of Member States concerns arise as to the effective capability of the 
DPAs to perform their tasks with complete independence. These concerns are partly due to 
the fact that staff are appointed exclusively by the government (e.g. Ireland, Luxembourg, 
UK) or by the Minister of Justice (Denmark, Netherlands), whereas, in contrast, in other 
Member States Data Protection Commissioners are elected by legislative assemblies (e.g. 
Germany,  Slovenia), sometimes pursuant to procedures which require consensus between the 
majority and the opposition (e.g. Greece), or in combined procedures involving executive, 
legislature, judiciary and organised societal groups (e.g. France, Spain, Portugal).  
                                                 
56   According to information provided by the WP29, 14 BCRs have been approved by DPAs so far, about 25  
        companies have provided DPAs with a first draft of BCRs and another 26 are being prepared.  
57   According to stakeholders' feedback, only the biggest companies can afford to adopt BCRs, due to the complexity 
        of the procedure and the related costs, which are € 20,000 on average but can amount – for very large companies 
        with many subsidiaries - to €1 million. 
58    C-518/07, European Commission v. Germany, 9.3.2010. 
 30
In some countries the DPA is attached to the Ministry of Justice. In some Member States  
(e.g. Slovenia, Poland) the dismissal of Data Protection Commissioners has to follow the 
same procedures as their appointment, and only in specified cases. In other countries, 
government can directly remove them from office (e.g. Ireland).  
 
Understaffing and lack of financial resources also pose problems in several Member States, 
restricting DPAs in the proper exercise of their tasks. Despite increases in the staff of most 
DPAs in recent years, the level of resources available to DPAs continues to remain limited in 
the majority of Member States with regard to their needs. In most Member States the DPAs 
receive their financial resources from the State's budget, and often from the budget allocated 
to the Ministry of Justice. In some Member States, these resources are increased through the 
revenues obtained from notifications and/or the financial sanctions imposed as a penalty for 
the infringement of data protection rules (e.g. Luxembourg, Malta). However, in the UK the 
DPA notification fees are the only financial source of the DPA (see section 2.9 on 
notifications). In a large number of Member States the lack of resources represents a 
significant challenge to the effectiveness of the national supervisory systems. In several 
Member States, DPAs do not have enough staff to handle all complaints. Furthermore, due to 
this lack of resources, some DPAs cannot regularly attend the meetings of the WP29. 
 
The concept of "complete independence" of Data Protection Authorities needs to be clarified 
on the basis of the recent Court of Justice ruling, including the requirement to provide 
sufficient resources for the effective performance of the tasks of the Data Protection 
Authorities. 
 
2.12.2. Investigative powers - Article 28(3), first indent   
In all Member States the Data Protection Authorities hear and review claims or complaints 
and are charged with investigating possible infringements of the data protection law within 
their jurisdiction. This includes that they are vested with powers to request and access all 
necessary information in relation to processing operations and filing systems and therefore 
usually demand full access to relevant sites and materials. A range of DPAs practice a 
selective approach, i.e. selecting particular issues or sectors for particular attention, because of 
the importance of the processing in the sector concerned, the sensitivity of data, or because of 
the level of complaints received about the sector. In such cases especially, investigations tend 
to be detailed and in-depth, including discussions with the data controllers, but less so with 
the data subjects or their representatives.  
 
In most Member States the DPAs are empowered to search premises without judicial warrant. 
In Belgium, DPA staff has the status of Officers of Judicial Police when carrying out on-site 
investigations, empowering them to demand, inter alia, the disclosure of documents and 
access locations. But in other Member States (e.g. France, Malta, Romania and UK), the DPA 
cannot enter premises without first obtaining a judicial warrant. 
 
In some Member States the investigative powers are not clearly spelt out in the legal text, 
being expressed as duties rather than as an express reference to powers, or without 
clarification of the relationship to other legislation.  
 
 31
2.12.3. Powers of intervention - Article 28(3), second indent 
The DPAs' powers of intervention differ from Member State to Member State. In most 
Member States the DPAs have the power to authorise processing operations likely to present 
specific risks, but not in others (e.g. Cyprus, Latvia, Spain and the UK). Experience shows 
that a major problem with these "prior checks" is that they are very time-consuming and 
demanding on human resources, and that too often they are carried out too late to be of any 
benefit in restructuring processing systems fundamentally, focussing instead on the minor 
details of such systems.  
 
In all Member States, the DPAs may issue a warning to or reprimand the controller, and, 
except in Belgium, issue decisions binding upon the controller to suspend data processing 
operations. In most Member States the DPAs are also empowered to order the erasure or 
destruction of data (but not e.g. in Belgium, Germany or the UK). In Germany, the DPA is 
empowered to demand the dismissal of a Data Protection Officer, if he/she does not possess 
the required specialised knowledge and demonstrate the necessary responsibility. In several 
Member States the law provides that such binding measures should be preceded by 
recommendations, opinions or warnings (e.g. Austria, Bulgaria, Denmark, France, Greece, 
Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia).  
 
In most Member States, the DPA has the power to impose sanctions, which mostly consist of 
imposition of administrative measures and/or financial sanctions/fines, however with 
considerable variation as to what constitutes an infringement and severity of sanctions (see 
section 2.10). Most DPAs report infringements to competent police and judicial authorities; in 
several Member States, such obligation is expressly laid down in data protection law (e.g. 
Cyprus, France, Lithuania, Netherlands and Slovenia). French law provides that the DPA may 
publish its warnings and, in certain situations, the penalties imposed. In several Member 
States the DPAs may refer the matter to national Parliament (including Belgium, Estonia, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Lithuania, Malta, Netherlands and Sweden). 
 
In all Member States formal actions and sanctions are, in practice, used as a last resort. In 
general, the DPAs see themselves more as advisors, facilitators and conciliators. In more than 
half of Member States, DPAs have issued guidelines to assist in the proper application of the 
data protection rules, including sector specific guidance. In cases of violations of data 
protection rules, DPAs in general first issue warnings, reminders or recommendations. In 
complex cases, DPAs often try to reach a compromise acceptable to the DPA and the 
controller. Such "soft measures" seem to be more effective where they are backed-up by 
effective enforcement powers available to the DPA in the event of non-compliance with the 
agreed measures.  
    
2.12.4. Power to engage in legal proceedings - Article 28(3), third indent  
In many Member States, national laws provide the immediate right to DPAs to bring an 
action to court. But in some Member States this is limited to the private sector or to specific 
situations. In Sweden, for instance, the right to bring an action in court is limited to the 
administrative courts for applications of the DPA to erase personal data which have been 
processed in an unlawful manner. In other Member States, DPAs have only the power to 
bring violations of the data protection rules to the attention of judicial authorities (e.g. 
Austria, Latvia and Ireland). In Slovenia, the DPA has the right to bring an action before the 
Constitutional Court to assess the constitutionality of legislation. In some Member States, 
 32
DPAs have the right to join in court proceedings which are initiated by other parties. In 
practice, also in many Member States, even where the DPAs have the power to engage in 
legal proceedings, the DPAs rarely commenced legal proceedings or intervened in legal 
proceedings on behalf of a data subject. In other Member States, the number of interventions 
ranged from 2 to a maximum of 143 cases per year. 
 
In several Member States, Data Protection Authorities are not endowed with the full range of 
powers to conduct investigations, intervene in data processing operations and engage in legal 
proceedings. The divergence in powers and approaches to enforcement taken by the 
individual DPAs causes problems not only for the data subjects who do not enjoy the same 
level of enforcement in each Member States, but also uncertainties for controllers, particularly 
when operating in several Member States.  
 
2.12.5. Appeals against decisions of supervisory authorities - Article 28(3) 
As regards the right to appeal against decisions of the Data Protection Authorities,  Danish 
law stipulates that no appeals may be brought before any other administrative authority 
against the decisions of the DPA, but does not clarify whether there is a right to go to court 
against those decisions. In Slovenia the law provides that there shall be no appeal against a 
decision or ruling of the DPA, but that an "administrative dispute" shall be permitted. Some 
Member States have no specific provision in their data protection law, but provide a general 
right to judicial review against any act of a public authority, on the basis of general court 
procedural law or, e.g. in Germany, on the basis of the Constitution.  
Competent courts are either the ordinary courts or administrative courts. In some Member 
States the competent court is the Supreme Administrative Court (e.g. Austria, Portugal) or the 
general Court of Appeals (e.g. Greece, Sweden), in France the Conseil d'Etat and in Malta a 
specific Data Protection Appeals Tribunal. In several countries judicial review is limited to 
certain acts of the DPA (e.g. Ireland, Luxembourg, UK), or to the grounds of "illegal conduct" 
of the DPA (Hungary). The competence and procedure of the courts and the conditions for a 
right to appeal follow the general national rules of their judicial systems. Cases in which data 
subjects or data controllers have appealed in courts against decisions taken by the national 
data protection supervisory authority are rather limited.  
 
Nearly all Member States guarantee in their national legislation the right to bring an action to 
court against decisions of the Data Protection Authority, either in data protection law or in 
general laws on judicial review.  
 
2.12.6. Cooperation of Data Protection Authorities - Article 28(6)  
Article 28(6) provides the competence of Data Protection Authorities to exercise their powers 
on the territory of their Member State, whatever national law is applicable, and the duty to 
exercise their powers on request of another DPA and to cooperate with each other "to the 
extent necessary for the performance of their duties".  
 
Some Member States have provisions which specifically allow them to act on the request of 
the DPA in another Member State (e.g. Denmark, France, Portugal, UK) or to also exercise, 
on its own territory, its powers in cases where the law of another Member State applies (e.g. 
Denmark, Netherlands, Portugal). Whereas several national laws do not contain any related 
provision, other Member States have transposed in their national law only the mandate to 
 33
cooperate with DPAs in other Member States or generally with "foreign" DPAs (e.g. Cyprus, 
Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Romania, and Spain).  
 
In practice, DPAs liaise and/or cooperate with authorities of other Member States mainly in 
the context of the Article 29 Working Party or in the mutual recognition procedure for BCRs 
(see point 2.11.3). There has also been separate cooperation as between Nordic countries, as 
well as on the part of Central and Eastern Europe Data Protection Commissioners. Other 
forms of cooperation concern the participation in the Article 31 committee, the Working Party 
on Police and Justice, fora such as the Spring Conference of Data Protection Authorities and 
joint supervision for SIS, Europol, Eurojust, Eurodac and the Customs Information System. 
Some DPAs have designated, within their organisation, a contact point for such cooperation. 
DPAs have also some experience in joint investigations, where each applies its own law in its 
own jurisdiction.  
 
However, the situation is more complex when jurisdiction and applicable law do not 
coincide. This concerns not only the legal aspect in terms of the applicable law to be 
followed, but also procedural aspects as regards the respective roles, responsibilities, powers 
and practices of each DPA involved. Thus, when a controller is established in more than one 
Member State or in other similar situations, the approaches taken by DPAs could considerably 
differ from one Member State to another.  
 
Despite the fact that the Directive creates the duty of mutual cooperation and information 
exchange, there is no cooperation mechanism established by the Directive to provide an 
effective cooperation in such situations. This is amplified by the lack of harmonisation with 
regard to investigation powers and the absence of a legal obligation to reply and to inform of 
the outcome of proceedings, while current cooperation seems to be based on "good will", and 
deadlines are difficult to respect. There is hardly any experience on the application of the 
national law of another Member State; difficulties could arise in enforcing the data protection 
law of another Member State especially for small DPAs which have limited resources for 
cooperation on such a scale. Due to the lack of detailed rules in the Directive, some DPAs 
apply the provisions on mutual assistance in the Council of Europe Convention for the 
Protection of Individuals with regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data59. 
However such an approach, as well as existing non-binding mechanisms and structures in the 
framework of the WP 29, are insufficient to ensure the consistent application of data 
protection rules across the EU (see point 2.13). This situation often leads to divergent 
decisions of DPAs vis-à-vis the same data controller for the same data processing. No one 
single DPA has a complete overview of the processing activities of companies that are 
established (or, if based outside the EU, have appointed a representative) in several Member 
States.  
 
Cooperation between DPAs is insufficient and does not ensure consistent enforcement of the 
common rules within the EU, in spite of the fact that the Directive creates the duty of mutual 
cooperation and information exchange. To improve the cooperation and coordination between 
Data Protection Authorities a cooperation mechanism should be introduced which ensures the 
consistent application and enforcement of the data protection rules in all Member States 
where this concerns issues with cross-border dimension. 
 
 
                                                 
59  ETS No. 108. 
 34
2.13. Article 29 Working Party  
The Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal 
Data established by Article 29 of the Directive with advisory status60 - the so-called "Article 
29 Working Party" (WP29) - is mandated to contribute to the uniform application of the 
Directive, to give the Commission an opinion on the level of protection in the EU and in third 
countries, on codes of conduct drawn up at EU level and advise the Commission on any 
amendment of the Directive and on any measures related to the protection of the rights and 
freedoms of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data. 
Since its creation, the Working Party has adopted 187 opinions (as at July 2011) and a variety 
of other documents. The opinions of the Working Party have dealt with topics including 
certain key concepts of the Directive, such as the opinions on the concept of personal data, the 
concepts of 'controller' and 'processor' and applicable law and on consent, as well as to the 
transfer of data to third countries and the level of protection in third countries or to specific 
issues.  
Although in some cases the opinions of the Working Party have a certain impact national 
legislation and practice – some Member States amended their data protection legislation, once 
or twice, as a result of the work of the Working Party61 – the continuing divergent application 
and interpretation of EU rules by Data Protection Authorities has not been resolved 
sufficiently. This is largely due to the fact that often DPAs are not in a position to enforce in 
their own national jurisdiction the very same principles they advocate at European level. 
Apart from the fact that the Working Party's opinions are not legally binding, this may be 
often caused by legal restraints particularly as regards the DPAs' competences and powers, 
which vary widely among Member States and the lack of a mechanism at EU level to ensure a 
coordinated application and enforcement of data protection rules (see section 2.12).  
Moreover, the fact that the Commission also ensures the secretariat of the WP29 leads to 
uncertainties as to the demarcation between the role of the Commission as an Institution, on 
the one hand, and its role as secretariat, on the other hand, particularly when the WP29 adopts 
opinions which are critical of the Commission's position. As member of the Working Party 
(albeit without voting rights) the Commission promotes its priorities, its views and requests 
for advice. In its role as secretariat, it is its role to assist the Working Party according to the 
Working Party's own priorities and approaches. 
 
The non-binding opinions of the Article 29 Working Party are insufficient to ensure the 
consistent application and interpretation of EU rules by Data Protection Authorities. The two-
fold role of the Commission, being member in the Working Party and providing at the same 
time its secretariat, bears the risk of "conflicts of interest".   
 
                                                 
60 The Article 29 Working Party is an advisory body composed of one representative of Member States', Data 
Protection Authorities, the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) and the Commission (without 
voting rights), which also provides its secretariat. See:  
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/workinggroup/index_en.htm . 
61  In Member States' replies to the survey, particular reference was made  to the opinions on the concept of 
personal data (WP 136), on the concepts of data controller and data processor (WP 169), on online social 
networking and on processing by video surveillance (WP 89). 
 35
3.  THE MAIN RESULTS: THE NEED FOR A NEW LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
The findings of this evaluation on key provisions of the Directive show that the problems 
encountered in the Commission's 2003 and 2007 implementation reports have not been solved 
since then. On the contrary, the problems in fully achieving its internal market policy 
objective, removing differences in the level of data protection actually afforded in the 
Member States and in ensuring effective enforcement across the EU have become more acute 
in particular due to fast and far-reaching development of digital technologies and online 
services.  
While the two-fold objective of ensuring an equivalent level of data protection amongst 
Member States and removing obstacles to the free movement of data as well as the key data 
protection principles remain valid, divergent approaches and gaps in the Directive and its 
application in Member States have led to legal fragmentation and uncertainty with negative 
consequences for businesses, individuals and the public sector and increasing difficulties for 
individuals in keeping control of their personal data. Since the Directive does not provide for 
sufficient protection in a fast-developing information society and globalised world, the 
increasing problems call for a new legal framework for the protection of personal data in the 
EU. 
 
As confirmed by the findings of this evaluation of key provision, the fragmentation and 
uncertainties in the implementation of the Directive 95/46/EC and new challenges require the 
EU to adapt the legal framework for the protection of personal data in the European Union.   
 
 36
 
ANNEX 3 
 
DATA PROTECTION IN THE AREAS OF POLICE AND JUDICIAL  
CO-OPERATION IN CRIMINAL MATTERS 
 
4. FRAGMENTATION OF THE EU LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROTECTION OF 
PERSONAL DATA IN THE AREAS OF POLICE COOPERATION AND JUDICIAL COOPERATION 
IN CRIMINAL MATTERS 
4.1. Directive 95/46/EC does not apply in these areas 
The general Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC62 applies to public and private data 
controllers and all sectors but does not apply to the processing of personal data in the areas of 
judicial cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation.63 Furthermore, Article 13(1) 
of the Directive allows for exemptions and restrictions of some important provisions of the 
Directive (relating to data quality, information, access, and publicising), inter alia for 
safeguarding national security, defence, public security and the  prevention, investigation, 
detection and prosecution of criminal offences.64 The exclusion of the area of judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation led to the adoption of specific rules at 
EU level for police and judicial co-operation in criminal matters65.Given the lack of a single 
EU instrument on data protection in this area until the adoption of Framework Decision 
2008/977/JHA in 2008, these specific rules generally refer either to national legislation of the 
Member States, or to the Convention of the Council of Europe (ETS 108)66 and – for those 
Member States which have ratified it – to the Additional Protocol to that Convention (ETS 
181)67, as well as to the principles of the non-legally binding Recommendation No. R (87) 15 
of the Council of Europe regulating the use of personal data in the police sector (Police 
Recommendation)68, which sets out the principles of Convention 108 for the police sector.  
                                                 
62  Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data 
(‘Directive’) (OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p.31). 
63 See Article 3(2), first indent, of Directive 95/46/EC: “This Directive shall not apply to the processing of 
personal data: - in the course of an activity which falls outside the scope of Community law, such as those 
provided for by Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union and in any case to processing operations 
concerning public security, defence, State security (including the economic well-being of the State when the 
processing operation relates to State security matters) and the activities of the State in areas of criminal 
law”. 
64  The  majority of Member States apply the Directive to the activities of police, customs, judicial and other 
competent authorities concerned with the prevention of and the fight against crime (see Commission Staff 
Working Document SEC(2005) 1241 as well as the replies of Member States to the Commission's 
questionnaire  on the implementation of the Framework Decision). 
65  See the list at the end of this annex. 
66  Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (CETS 
No.: 108), (‘Convention 108’). 
67  Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing 
of Personal Data, regarding supervisory authorities and transborder data flows ETS No.: 181, (‘Additional 
Protocol’). 
68  Recommendation No R (87) 15 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States regulating the use of 
personal data in the police sector, (‘Police Recommendation’).  
 37
4.2. Gaps and shortcomings in Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA 
4.2.1. Limited scope of application of Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA  
Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA69 had to be implemented by Member States by 27 
November 2010 (Article 29(1)).70 It applies to personal data which for the purpose of the 
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of 
criminal penalties are transferred between different Member States (Article 1 (2)(a)), or 
which, after having been transferred between different Member States are subsequently 
transferred to a third country or international organisation (Article 13). It furthermore applies 
to personal data which are or have been transmitted or made available by Member States to 
authorities or to information systems established on the basis of the former Title VI of the 
Treaty on European Union (‘Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters’) (Article 
1(2)(b)), or are or have been transmitted or made available to the competent authorities of the 
Member States by authorities or information systems established on the basis of the former 
Treaty on European Union or the former Treaty establishing the European Community 
(Article 1(2)(c)). 
• No application to domestic data processing: 
 
As a first consequence of the scope as described in Article 1 (2)(a), the Framework Decision 
does not apply to domestic processing operations by competent judicial or police authorities 
in the Member States, or to direct transfers from a Member State to a third country or an 
international organisation. 
 Example 1: Exchange of personal data with Interpol  
The Council Common Position 2005/69/JHA71 on exchanging certain data with the 
International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) obliges Member States to take 
the necessary measures to allow for the exchange of data between their competent law 
enforcement authorities and Interpol.  
The Framework Decision does not apply to direct exchanges of personal data by 
Member States with Interpol. 
However it would apply once personal data had been exchanged between Member 
States and then transferred to Interpol (Article 13 of the Framework Decision).  
 
This distinction between personal data to be transferred or exchanged, and personal data being 
processed at domestic level only, exists neither in the relevant Council of Europe instruments, 
nor in the Directive. Both instruments apply without distinction to the processing of data 
carried out within Member States and when transferred from a Member State to a third 
country.72 As held by the ECJ in a number of cases73, the rules on the protection of 
                                                 
69 Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA of 27.11.2008 on the protection of personal data processed in 
the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters (OJ L 350, 30.12.2008, p. 60) 
(‘Framework Decision’).  
70  See separate implementation report, COM(….).  
71  Council Common Position 2005/69/JHA of 24 January 2005 on exchanging certain data with Interpol, (OJ 
2005 L 27, 29.1.2005, p. 61). 
72  See, e.g. Directive 95/46/EC Articles 3 and 4, and Articles 25-26. 
73  See Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/01 and C-139/01 Rechnungshof, paragraphs 41-43 (op cit); Case C-376/98 Germany 
v. Parliament and Council, paragraph 85; Case C-491/01 British American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 
60. 
 38
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and the free movement of such data 
apply regardless of whether or not there is a cross-border dimension.   
Moreover, this distinction is difficult to make in practice: personal data which have been 
gathered in a purely domestic context can hardly be factually distinguished from data that 
have been subject to cross-border transmission. A priori, any purely domestically processed 
data may be subject to cross-border transmission. It can complicate the actual implementation 
and application of the Framework Decision and other legal instruments at EU level: good co-
operation between Member States requires there to be mutual trust regarding the data 
protection of information received from other Member States. Such a high degree of trust can 
only be achieved if the protection (and the ensuing reliability) of all data which – at a later 
stage – may be transferred to other Member States, is fully ensured.  
This distinction also may lead, in these areas, to different levels of data protection in different 
Member States between personal data to be transferred or exchanged or personal data being 
processed at domestic level only. Neither Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of 
the European Union nor Article 8 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms excludes any situation or sector from the scope of protection.74  
This distinction also creates legal uncertainty – both for data subjects and for competent 
authorities – as to which rules should apply when personal data are processed by police and 
judicial authorities.  
This limited scope of the Framework Decision already leads to legal and practical deficiencies 
for the protection of personal data at EU level: more and more EU legislation creates 
harmonised legal obligations upon private or public sector data controllers requiring the 
processing and exchange of personal data for purposes of prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences, without providing for correspondingly harmonised and/or 
comprehensive provisions for the protection of personal data, as the Framework Decision 
does not apply to the domestic processing of personal data in these situations.  
This shortcoming of the Framework Decision has been pointed out also by several Member 
States during an expert meeting in February 2011 on the implementation of the Framework 
Decision. It has also been criticised by the European Data Protection Supervisor.75 The 
European Parliament76, the Conference of Data Protection Authorities77, and the Council of 
Europe's T-PD Consultative Committee – consisting of data protection representatives of 
European governments – have all made clear in various occasions that the non-applicability of 
the Framework Decision to domestic processing of personal data is a key weakness.  
• Application only to ‘competent authorities:’ 
 
The Framework Decision applies to the processing of personal data by ‘competent authorities’ 
(or ‘information systems’) which transfer or make available personal data to other competent 
police or judicial authorities. In that context, ‘competent authorities’ means “agencies or 
                                                 
74  In the second subparagraph of Article 16(2) TFEU a distinction is only made as far as a specific legal instrument for the 
Common Foreign and Security Policy is concerned. 
75  European Data Protection Supervisor, third opinion of 27 April 2007 on the proposal for a Council 
Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial 
co-operation in criminal matters, OJ 2007 C 139, p.1. 
76  European Parliament legislative resolution of 7 June 2007 on the proposal for a Council Framework 
Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in 
criminal matters (renewed consultation) (7315/2007 – C6-0115/2007 – 2005/0202(CNS)). 
77  See in particular: Declaration adopted by the European Data Protection Authorities in Cyprus on 11 May 
2007 and the Common position of the European Data Protection Authorities on the use of the concept of 
availability in law enforcement Cyprus, 10. - 11. May 2007. 
 39
bodies established by legal acts adopted by the Council pursuant to Title VI of the Treaty on 
European Union, as well as police, customs, judicial and other competent authorities of the 
Member States that are authorised by national law to process personal data” within the scope 
of the Framework Decision (Article 2 h)); 
However, as a second consequence of the limited scope as described above, the Framework 
Decision does not apply to activities by data controllers, which are not competent police 
or judicial authorities, but which are transferring personal data within "a framework 
established by the public authorities that relates to public security", as described by the case 
law of the ECJ and are therefore in some way connected with the prevention, investigation, 
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties or 
enforcement of criminal law.  
This is the case e.g. for air carriers providing travellers information to police authorities of 
third countries, or internet service providers which have retained communication data for the 
purpose of fighting serious crimes, as required by Directive 2006/24/EC on data retention78. 
The Framework Decision therefore fails to address this legal uncertainty.79 
4.2.2. Low level of harmonisation of the Framework Decision 
The Framework Decision provides for a low level of harmonisation. It allows national laws 
providing for the protection of personal data at national level to impose higher safeguards 
than those established in the Framework Decision (Article 1(5)). As a consequence, national 
processing restrictions in place in one Member State have to be met by the other Member 
States (Article 12). The higher safeguards may also result from legal instruments adopted at 
EU level its Article 28 also states: “where in acts adopted prior to the date of entry into force 
of this Framework Decision and regulating the exchange of personal data between Member 
States [...] specific conditions have been introduced as to the use of such data by the receiving 
Member State these conditions shall take precedence over the provisions of this Framework 
Decision” (see below § 1.3). 
Furthermore, the Framework Decision also ‘does not affect’ Convention 108 and its 
Additional Protocol (recital 41), thereby leaving it open for interpretation if its level of 
protection is ‘at least equal’ to the one of the Convention 108.  
By contrast, other former third pillar instruments require Member States explicitly to adopt 
national data protection provisions in order to achieve a level of protection of personal data 
‘at least equal’ to that resulting from the Convention 108 (Schengen Implementing 
Convention Aricle 126) or additionally to the Additional Protocol with the Police 
Recommendation (Prüm Decision Article 25).  
4.2.3. No powers of EU institutions vis-à-vis the Framework Decision  
As to the powers of the EU institutions, Protocol 36 on Transitional provisions annexed to the 
Treaty of Lisbon provides that the Commission has no infringement powers in the case of the 
Framework Decision (Article 10). Also, the powers of the Court of Justice are to remain the 
same with respect to those acts in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in 
                                                 
78  Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the retention of 
data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic 
communications services or of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC (OJ L 
105, 13.4.2006, p. 54). 
79  See the Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor on the Communication from the Commission 
to the European Parliament and the Council on the follow-up of the Work Programme for better 
implementation of the Data Protection Directive (OJ C 255, 27.10.2007, p. 1). See also the EDPS Annual 
Report 2006, p. 47. 
 40
criminal matters which were adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. Till 
these transitional measures cease to have effect five years after the date of entry into force of 
the Treaty of Lisbon, this legal status of the Framework Decision has implications to the 
extent that current rules for data controllers are not uniform and coherent across the EU. 
Furthermore, the Commission does not have implementing powers and there is no 
competence for the Article 29 Working Party composed by DPAs aiming at fostering 
common interpretation. 
4.3. The Framework Decision’s relationship with other legal instruments 
4.3.1. Unclear rules of precedence 
The Framework Decision did not replace or specifically amend the various existing sector-
specific legislative instruments for police and judicial co-operation in criminal matters with 
data protection provisions. The articulation between the Framework Decision and these other 
data protection provisions contained in ex third pillar legal acts is not always clear.  
Article 28 of the Framework Decision spells out a rule of precedence of acts adopted prior 
to the date of entry into force of the Framework Decision (19.1.2009).  
However, some former third pillar acts have been adopted after the entry into force of 
the Framework Decision. This includes:  
- Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA on criminal records exchange80, which states that 
its specific data protection rules complement the general data protection rules in force, but 
with no specific reference to Framework Decision (recital 13 in the preamble); 
- Decision 2009/316/JHA on the establishment of the criminal records system ECRIS81, 
which implements Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA on this issue, states that the 
Framework Decision ‘should’ apply in the context of computerised exchange of data 
between Member States, while allowing Member States to set higher levels of protection 
(recital 18 in the preamble); 
- Decision 2009/371/JHA establishing Europol82, which replaced the prior Europol 
Convention and Protocols as from 1 January 2010, equally provides that the Framework 
Decision on data protection applies to the processing by Member States of the data to 
Europol, but that as regards Europol as such, the data protection rules in the Europol 
Decision replaced the general rules of the Framework Decision because of the ‘particular 
nature, functions and competences of Europol’ (recital 12 in the preamble); the same 
applies to two implementing decisions on Europol analysis work files83, and on Europol’s 
                                                 
80  Council Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA of 26 February 2009 on the organisation and content of the 
exchange of information extracted from the criminal record between Member States (OJ L 93 7.4.2009, p. 
23). 
81  Council Decision 2009/316/JHA of 6 April 2009 on the establishment of the European Criminal Records 
Information System (ECRIS) in application of Article 11 of Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA (OJ L 93, 
7.4.2009, p. 33). 
82  Council Decision 2009/371/JHA of 6 April 2009 establishing the European Police Office (Europol), (OJ L 
121, 15.5.2009, p. 37). 
83  Council Decision 2009/936/JHA of 30 November 2009 adopting the implementing rules for Europol 
analysis work files (OJ L 325, 11.12.2009, p. 14). 
 41
relations with partners, including the exchange of personal data and classified 
information84; 
- Amending Decision 2009/426/JHA to the Decision establishing Eurojust85 specifies that 
the Framework Decision on data protection applies to the processing by Member States of 
the data transmitted between the Member States and Eurojust, but that the data protection 
rules applying to Eurojust as such (as amended by this later Decision) are not affected by 
the Framework Decision, because of the ‘particular nature, functions and competences of 
Eurojust’ (recital 13 in the preamble);  
- Framework Decision 2009/829/JHA on the recognition of pre-trial supervision orders86 
also states that the Framework Decision applies to personal data exchange within its scope 
(recital 19 in the preamble); 
- Decision 2009/917/JHA establishing the Customs Information System (CIS)87, which 
replaces the CIS-Convention and its Protocols as from 27 May 2011 (Art 34), contains a 
number of specific references to the Framework Decision, which applies to the CIS unless 
otherwise provided for in the Decision (Art 20);  
- Framework Decision 2009/948/JHA on conflicts of jurisdiction88 states that the 
Framework Decision applies to personal data exchange within its scope (recital 18).  
As regards the acts adopted prior to the entry into force of the Framework Decision, 
Article 28 does not clarify whether "specific conditions as to the use of such data by the 
receiving Member State" should also relate to general principles for the protection of personal 
data, such as guaranteeing lawful processing or supervision by independent data protection 
authorities or if they are only to be understood as being limited to conditions of use, e.g. a 
prohibition to process personal data supplied for the prevention of criminal offences for a 
major event with a cross border dimension for other purposes.  
Recital 39 lists some existing measures which are deemed to set out a “complete and 
coherent set of rules” regarding data protection and remain unaffected by the Framework 
Decision. This creates legal uncertainty, in particular, because there is no exhaustive list of 
legal instruments that are to remain unaffected. As a consequence, it is left to the 
interpretation on a case-by-case basis which rules apply to a concrete situation. Furthermore, 
despite explicit references in the recital (but not in the legal text itself), it is not entirely clear 
whether the specific rules in these measures mentioned apply entirely instead of the rules in 
the Framework Decision or if the Framework Decision could apply e.g. in case of possible 
gaps in the legal instruments cited. 
                                                 
84  Council Decision 2009/934/JHA of 30 November 2009 adopting the implementing rules governing 
Europol’s relations with partners, including the exchange of personal data and classified information 
(OJ L 2009, L 325, 11.12.2009, p. 6). 
85  Council Decision 2009/426/JHA of 16 December 2008 on the strengthening of Eurojust and amending 
Decision 2002/187/JHA setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight against serious crime 
(‘Eurojust Decision 2009’) (OJ L 138, 4.6.2009, p. 14) 
86  Council Framework Decision 2009/829/JHA of 23 October 2009 on the application, between Member States 
of the European Union, of the principle of mutual recognition to decisions on supervision measures as an 
alternative to provisional detention (OJ L 294, 11.11.2009, p.20). 
87  Council Decision 2009/917/JHA of 30 November 2009 on the use of information technology for customs 
purposes (OJ L 323, 10.12.2009, p 20). 
88  Council Framework Decision 2009/948/JHA of 30 November 2009 on prevention and settlement of 
conflicts of exercise of jurisdiction in criminal proceedings (OJ L 328, 15.12.2009, p. 42). 
 42
As regards measures targeted by recital 40 of the Framework Decision which have “more 
limited data protection rules”, they apply instead of the Framework Decision if the conditions 
imposed – as to the use or further transfer of personal data - on receiving Member States are 
‘more restrictive’ than the Framework Decision, but otherwise the Framework Decision 
applies. Again, this leaves a large room for interpretation and therefore does not provide legal 
certainty neither for individuals nor for police and other competent authorities.  
 
4.3.2. Differences in content between the Framework Decision and the other legal 
instruments with specific data protection provisions 
A comparison of the substantive rules contained in the Framework Decision with the 
abovementioned other legal instruments with data protection relevance, in particular Directive 
95/46/EC, shows differences in content, some of which are presented below. 
• Definition of ‘personal data’: 
The definition of ‘personal data’ (Article 2 (a) Directive) can equally be found e.g. in the 
Framework Decision (Article 2 (a)), while the definitions used for the SIS II Decision (Article 
3 (d), or the CIS Decision (Article 2 No. 2) are only identical as to the main part of the 
definition, and do not describe further what is to be understood under an ‘identifiable person’. 
The Prüm Decision adds that “processing within the meaning of this Decision shall also 
include notification of whether or not a hit exists” (Article 24 (1) a)). 
 
• Limitations to the purpose limitation principle: 
The Directive requires personal data to be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate 
purposes and prohibits further processing in a way incompatible with those purposes (Article 
6(1)(b)).  
While the Framework Decision does lay down similar principles in its Article 3, it leaves it 
explicitly to the Member States to determine more precisely at national level which other 
purposes are to be considered as incompatible with the purpose for which the personal data 
were originally collected (recital 6). It also provides for further exceptions from the purpose 
limitation rule, as regards data received from other Member States (Article 11), including 
further processing for “any other purpose”, with the prior consent of the transmitting Member 
State or with the consent of the data subject, given in accordance with national law (Article 11 
(d)). Equally, the Prüm Decision provides that although processing of personal data by the 
receiving Member State is ‘permitted solely’ for the purposes for which the data have been 
originally transferred, processing ‘for other purposes’ is admissible with prior authorisation of 
the Member State administering the file and subject to the national laws of both receiving and 
administering Member State (Article 26). A similar provision exists in the CIS Decision 
(Article 8).  
In consequence, a provision permitting processing ‘for other purposes’ means that in practice 
any personal data, including sensitive data, processed by a competent police authority in one 
Member State and transmitted to another Member State may be processed for different 
purposes other than those for which they were originally collected and then transmitted and 
thereby emptying the purpose limitation principle of its value. In this context, the “consent” or 
“authorisation” of the transmitting authority cannot be considered under any circumstances as 
providing a valid legal ground to derogate from the purpose limitation principle. 
• Periodic review of personal data processed: 
The periodic review provided for by Article 5 of the Framework Decision refers to review of 
the need for the storage of the data but does not ensure the periodic verification of data quality 
 43
and does not ensure that police files are purged in practice of superfluous data and kept up to 
date.89 The importance of such review is important both to ensure individuals' rights and for 
the efficient operation of police services.  
• Information to the data subject:  
Under the Framework Decision (Article 16), Member States have to ensure that their 
competent authorities inform data subjects of processing, unless national law provides 
otherwise or in cases of transfer to another Member State where that Member State has 
requested that the data subject is not to be informed. The Framework Decision does not 
specify form, content and modalities of that information and leaves this to national law. 
Under the Europol and Prüm Decisions it is established that when a data subject is informed it 
must be in an ‘intelligible’ or ‘comprehensible’ form. Under the Prüm Decision it must be 
free of charge.  
• Right of access:  
Under the Framework Decision (Article 17), a data subject has the right to obtain, without 
constraint or excessive delay or expense, either: 
(a)  at least a confirmation from the controller or from the national supervisory authority 
as to whether or not data relating to him have been transmitted or made available and 
information on the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the data have been 
disclosed and communication of the data undergoing processing, or 
(b)  at least a confirmation from the national supervisory authority that all necessary 
verifications have taken place. 
This information or confirmation can either be provided directly by the competent authority 
(“direct access”) or by the supervisory authority (“indirect access”)90. Member States may 
legislate restrictions to this right of access, in order to avoid obstructing official or legal 
inquiries, investigations or procedures; prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation 
and prosecution of criminal offences or for the execution of criminal penalties; protecting 
public security; protecting national security; and protecting the data subject or the rights and 
freedoms of others (Article 17 (2)). Any refusals on behalf of the controller to provide this 
information must be made in writing (Article17 (3)).  
Both the 2002 Eurojust Decision (Article 19) and the Europol Decision (Article 30) provide 
for a specific right of access in a detailed provision. Other than these instruments, out of 26 
other instruments, only six provide for a specific right of access in a specific provision: the 
Schengen Implementing Convention (Article 109), the SIS II Decision (Article 58), the 
Naples II Convention (Article 25), the Prüm Decision (Article 31), the VIS access Decision91 
(Article 14) and the CIS Decision (Article 22). All these instruments require the right of 
                                                 
89  As foreseen by principles 3 and 7 of the Police Recommendation. See the Opinion of the European Data 
Protection Supervisor on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the 
Council on the follow-up of the Work Programme for better implementation of the Data Protection 
Directive (OJ C 255, 27.10.2007, p. 1). See also the EDPS Annual Report 2006, p. 47. 
90  This latter possibility is destined for those Member States which have provided for the right of access of the 
data subject in criminal matters through a system where the national supervisory authority, in place of the 
data subject, has access to all the personal data related to the data subject without any restriction and may 
also rectify, erase or update inaccurate data. In such a case of indirect access, the national law of those 
Member States may provide that the national supervisory authority will inform the data subject only that all 
the necessary verifications have taken place. This seems to appliy, in particular, in France and Belgium. 
91  Council Decision 2008/633/JHA of 23 June 2008 concerning access for consultation of the Visa Information 
System (VIS) by designated authorities of Member States and by Europol for the purposes of the prevention, 
detection and investigation of terrorist offences and of other serious criminal offences  (OJ L 218, 
13.8.2008, p. 129). 
 44
access to be exercised in accordance with national law (in the case of the CIS Decision, 
implementing the Framework Decision) and some allow the national supervisory authority to 
decide whether and how that right can be exercised (SIC, SIS II, VIS Access Decision). The 
involvement of other MS before granting access is expressly foreseen (SIC, SIS II, Naples II, 
VIS access). Only the Prüm Decision lays down further details as to which information is to 
be given (e.g. which data are being processed, legal basis for the processing, etc.). All lay 
down grounds for refusal for access, but while similar use different grounds and differently 
wording.  
• Rights to correction, deletion and blocking of data:  
Under the Framework Decision a data subject has the right to obtain, without constraint or 
excessive delay or expense, confirmation of data processing (Article 17(1)). Any refusals on 
behalf of the controller to provide this information must be made in writing (Article17 (3)). 
The data subject also has the right to request rectification, erasure or blocking of personal data 
(Article 18(1)). Each Member State will decide whether the request must be made to the data 
controller or to the national supervisory authority. Any refusals on behalf of the controller to 
rectify, erase or block data must be made in writing to the data subject (Article 18(1)).  
Under other legislative acts with access rights provisions, concrete time limits have been 
established by which requests made by data subjects must be dealt with. Under the Europol 
Decision, a subject requesting the deletion or correction of data will be informed of the 
outcome of their request within a maximum of three months (Article 31(5)). Under the 
Eurojust Decision, requests of access must also be dealt with within a maximum of three 
months and access to data are free of charge (Article 19(2)). Under Schengen legislation and 
the VIS Decision, requests for deletion must be dealt with within 60 days.  
• Transfers to third countries or international organisations:   
The Framework Decision establishes that personal data may be transferred to competent 
authorities in third States or to international bodies. This is generally allowed if ‘adequate 
protection’ is provided, and it is necessary for the prevention, investigation, detection or 
prosecution of criminal offences or execution of criminal penalties, and with the prior 
authorisation of the original Member State (Article 13). The assessment of adequacy is left to 
the Member States on the basis of indicative criteria (see the text of Article 13 (4) DPFD).  
There are also several exceptions to this rule, in particular when the national law of the 
transferring Member States so provides because of ‘legitimate prevailing interests’ (Article 
13(3)). These specific rules on the transfer of data to third states or international bodies differ 
significantly from those applicable under the Directive (Articles 25, 26).  
Example 2: Third country data transfers 
Member State A considers that a third country X with which it has a bilateral data 
transfer agreement ensures an ‘adequate’ level of protection.  
Member State B did not conclude a similar bilateral agreement with the same third 
country X and does not consider that country X ensures an ‘adequate’ level of 
protection.  
Under the rules of the Framework Decision, Member State A is able to transfer 
personal data of individuals from Member State B, if transmitted to it by Member 
State B previously, to third country X – in emergencies without Member State B’s 
authorisation. 
Had third country X requested this personal data directly from Member State B, third 
country X would not have received the data directly from Member State B as Member 
State B considers X as not ensuring an 'adequate' level of protection and would 
prohibit the transfer. 
 45
Other instruments also allow for the transfer of data to third countries or international 
organisations: by way of example, under the SIS II Decision, data cannot be transferred to 
third countries or to international organisations except for stolen, misappropriated, lost or 
invalidated passports, which may be exchanged with members of Interpol by establishing a 
connection between SIS II and the Interpol database on stolen or missing travel documents. 
The VIS Decision Article 8(4) says that VIS data shall not be transferred or made available to 
a third country or to an international organisation. However, in an exceptional case of urgency 
such data may be transferred or made available to a third country/international organisation 
exclusively for the purposes of the prevention and detection of terrorist offences and of other 
serious criminal offences subject to the consent of the originating MS.  
The Framework Decision is furthermore ‘without prejudice’ to existing obligations and 
commitments incumbent upon Member States or upon the Union by virtue of bilateral and/or 
multilateral agreements with third States existing at the time of its adoption (Article 26), e.g. 
to the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Iceland and the 
Kingdom of Norway on the surrender procedure between the Member States of the 
European Union and Iceland and Norway92 or the Agreement between the European Union 
and Iceland and Norway on the application of certain provisions of the Prüm Decision93. 
However, future agreements have to comply with the rules on exchanges with third States: 
Article 26 provides for the application of conditions of Article 13 (1)(c) or (2) when falling 
within the scope of the Framework Decision. 
• Supervisory authorities 
As in the Directive, the Framework Decision recognises that the establishment in Member 
States of supervisory authorities, exercising their functions with complete independence, is an 
essential component of the protection of personal data processed within the framework of 
police and judicial cooperation between the Member States. It also allows that the supervisory 
authorities already established in Member States under the Directive to assume such 
responsibility (recitals 33, 34). The Prüm Decision also refers specifically to a supervisory 
authority within the meaning of the Directive (Article 31). 
The Framework Decision does not establish rules related to the existing joint supervisory 
authorities. The instruments concerning Europol, Eurojust and CIS make specific provisions 
for the establishment up of a joint supervisory authority. The Europol Decision obliges an 
Independent Joint Supervisory Body to be set up to review the activities of Europol in order to 
ensure that the rights of individuals are not violated through the storage, processing and use of 
the data held in Europol.94. 
                                                 
92  OJ L 292, 21.10.2006, p. 2. 
93  Council Decision of 21 September 2009 on the signing, on behalf of the European Union, and on the 
provisional application of certain provisions of the Agreement between the European Union and Iceland and 
Norway on the application of certain provisions of Council Decision 2008/615/JHA on the stepping up of 
cross- border cooperation, particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime and Council Decision 
2008/616/JHA on the implementation of Decision 2008/615/JHA on the stepping up of cross-border 
cooperation, particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime, and the Annex thereto 
(2009/1023/JHA), (OJ L 353, 31.12.2009, p.1). 
94  According to Eurojust legislation the Joint Supervisory Body comprises a judge appointed by each Member 
State who is not a member of Eurojust, whereas under the CIS Decision, a Joint Supervisory Authority 
consists of two representatives from each Member State’s respective independent national supervisory 
authority. For the SIS, Europol and the CIS, there is a Joint secretariat. See Council Decision of 17 October 
2000 establishing a secretariat for the joint supervisory data-protection bodies set up by the Convention on 
the Establishment of a European Police Office (Europol Convention), the Convention on the Use of 
Information Technology for Customs Purposes and the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement 
on the gradual abolition of checks at the common borders (Schengen Convention) (OJ L 271, 24/10/2000, 
p.1). 
 46
The Framework Decision does not establish any provisions concerning the European Data 
Protection Supervisor (EDPS). In this respect, the CIS Decision stipulates that the EDPS is to 
supervise the activities of the Commission regarding the CIS. The SIS II Decision (when it 
will be applicable) envisages that the EDPS will supervise processing activities of the 
Management Authority of SIS II; the same is the case also for the VIS decision. The VIS 
Regulation further stipulates that the EDPS is responsible for checking that personal data 
processing activities of the Management Authority are carried out in accordance with the VIS 
Regulation. The EDPS is also to ensure that data processing activities carried out by the 
Management Authority are audited. Under the SIS II Decision the EDPS is to act as a 
mediator between Member States in disputes regarding the correction or deletion of data.  
5. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND OTHER STANDARDS  
The protection of personal data is recognised as a fundamental right and has been interpreted 
by the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) and the European Court of 
Human Rights (ECtHR). 
5.1. Fundamental Rights Standards 
5.1.1. Case law interpreting Article 8 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
Important case law provided guidance for the interpretation of this fundamental right by the 
European Court of Justice (ECJ) in particular in the following cases: Commission v Federal 
Republic of Germany95, concerning the lack of independence of the national supervisory 
authorities, and Schecke et al.96 As underlined by the ECJ in the latter decision, the 
fundamental right to the protection of personal data is not an absolute right, but must be 
considered in relation to its function in society. Article 8(2) of the Charter thus authorises the 
processing of personal data if certain conditions are satisfied. It provides that personal data 
‘must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person 
concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law’.  
5.1.2. Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights of the Council of 
Europe (ECHR) 
Under Article 8 of the ECHR European Convention of Human Rights of the Council of 
Europe (ECHR), “everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home 
and his correspondence.” Data protection emerges from the jurisprudence of the European 
Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg as an aspect of privacy protection. The case law is 
particularly relevant for the police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters.  
The ECtHR has found in Article 8 ECHR not only negative obligations for the Member States 
to abstain from interfering with the right to privacy, but also positive obligations, that entail 
‘the adoption of measures designed to secure respect for private life even in the sphere of the 
relations of individuals themselves’.97  In M.S. v. Sweden98, for instance, the ECtHR made 
clear that ‘the protection of personal data [...] is of fundamental importance to a person’s 
enjoyment of his or her right to respect for private and family life as guaranteed by Article 8 
of the Convention’.  
 
                                                 
95   C-518/07, European Commission v. Germany, 9.3.2010. 
96  Joint cases C-92/09 and C-93/09, Volker und Markus Schecke GbR, Hartmut Eifert v. Land Hessen, 
9.11.2010. 
97  See X and Y v Netherlands, judgement of 26 march 1985, para 23. 
98  M.S. v Sweden, judgment of 27 August 1997. 
 47
The collection of information by officials of the State about an individual will always concern 
his or her private life and will thus fall within the scope of Article 8 (1) ECHR. This includes 
for example: an official census which includes compulsory questions relating to the sex, 
marital status, place of birth and other personal details99; the recording of fingerprinting, 
photography and other personal information by the police100even if the police register is 
secret101; the collection of medical data and the maintenance of medical records102; the 
compulsion by state authorities to reveal details of personal expenditure (and thus intimate 
details of private life)103; records relating to past criminal cases104; information relating to 
terrorist activity105, collecting personal information in order to protect national security106. 
 
5.1.3. Possible limitations to the fundamental right to personal data protection and to 
private life 
Limitations on the right to privacy and data protection may be applied only when certain 
conditions are met. Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights accepts 
interference only where it is "in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic 
society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the 
country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for 
the protection of the rights and freedoms of others".  
Article 52(1) of the Charter accepts limitations only where they are "provided for by law and 
respect the essence of those rights and freedoms. Subject to the principle of proportionality, 
limitations may be made only if they are necessary and genuinely meet objectives of general 
interest recognised by the Union or the need to protect the rights and freedoms of others". 
These are the provisions that serve as a frame of reference for the Court of Justice, which 
follows the lead of the European Court of Human Rights (Court of Human Rights) on this 
matter, when examining the compatibility of a data-processing measure with the rights 
in question107. 
Once an interference or infringement of the rights has been established, then, in application of 
the Court of Human Rights criterion that "[t]he mere storing of data relating to the private 
life of an individual amounts to an interference",108 the grounds for that interference must be 
examined, which involves three cumulative conditions109 that the interference or infringement 
must: 
(1) be in accordance with the law, which requires in particular:  
                                                 
99  Appl. No. 9072/82, X v. the United Kingdom, 6 Oct. 1982, 30 DR 229. 
100  Murray v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 28 Oct. 1994, Series A no. 300-A. 
101  Leander v. Sweden, judgment of 26 March 1987, Series A no. 116. 
102  Appl. No. 14661/81,  9 July 1991, 71 DR 141. 
103  Appl. No. 9804/82, 7 Dec. 1982, 31 DR 231. 
104  Friedl v. Austria, Comm. Rep., 19 May 1994, p. 20. 
105  McVeigh, O’Neill and Evans v. the United Kingdom, 18 March 1981, DR 24 p. 15. 
106  Leander v. Sweden, judgment of 26 March 1987, para. 59. 
107 See the aforementioned Volker judgment. See also the judgment of 20 May 2003 (Österreichischer 
Rundfunk) in Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/01 and C-139/01 (ECR 2003, p. I-4989). 
108 Judgment of the Court of Human Rights, Marper, dated 4 December 2008, 30562/04 and 30566/04, 
paragraph 67. 
109 See paragraph 62 of the aforementioned Volker judgment and paragraph 76 of the aforementioned 
Österreichischer Rundfunk judgment. On the case-law of the Court of Human Rights, see also the 
aforementioned opinion of the Legal Service 10146/01. 
 48
- that the measure "should have some basis in domestic law, but also refers to the 
quality of the law in question, [which] should be accessible to the person concerned 
and foreseeable as to its effects"110;  
- rules involving negative consequences for individuals should be clear and precise and 
their application predictable for those subject to them111;  
- that the measure must be foreseeable, i.e. drawn up with sufficient precision to enable 
the individual to regulate his conduct"112. It is "essential […] to have clear, detailed 
rules governing the scope and application of measures, as well as minimum 
safeguards concerning, inter alia, duration, storage, usage, access of third parties, 
procedures for preserving the integrity and confidentiality of data and procedures for 
its destruction, thus providing sufficient guarantees against the risk of abuse and 
arbitrariness"113. 
- States "do not enjoy an unlimited discretion to subject persons within their jurisdiction 
to secret surveillance" and must provide adequate and effective guarantees against 
abuse". 114 
(2) meet a general-interest objective recognised by the Union (legitimate aim): 
Article 52(1) of the Charter requires that the restrictions imposed on the exercise of the rights 
in question "genuinely meet objectives of general interest recognised by the Union"115. 
Article 8(2) of the ECHR lists the various legitimate goals, including national security, public 
safety and the prevention of crime". 
         (3) be necessary and respond effectively to a general-interest objective:  
This condition presupposes a review of proportionality according to settled case-law of the 
Court of Justice "the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of 
European Union law, requires that measures implemented by acts of the European Union are 
appropriate for attaining the objective pursued and do not go beyond what is necessary to 
achieve it".116  
The objective pursued must in effect be reconciled with the fundamental rights set forth in 
Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter.117 It is thus necessary to balance on the one hand "the 
European Union's interest" in improving security through the prevention and combating of 
crime and, on the other hand, "the interference with the right of [individual data subjects] to 
respect for their private life in general and to the protection of their personal data in 
particular".118  
                                                 
110 See paragraph 52 of the aforementioned Rotaru judgment.  
111  see ECJ, Case C-110/03 Belgium v Commission [2005] ECR I-2801, paragraph 30; Case C-76/06 P 
Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission [2007] ECR I-4405, paragraph 79; and Case C-226/08 Stadt 
Papenburg [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 45. 
112 See paragraph 95 of the aforementioned Marper judgment. See also paragraph 77 of the aforementioned 
judgment of the Court of Justice on Österreichischer Rundfunk. 
113 See paragraph 99 of the aforementioned Marper judgment. 
114 Judgment of the Court of Human Rights, Klass, dated 6 September 1978, No 5029/71, paragraphs 49 and 
50. - See also the Judgment dated 4 April 2006 of the German Constitutional Court (BvR 518/02) which 
overturned a decision authorising searches by electronic profiling, through cross-checking data in a number 
of databases. 
115 See paragraph 67 of the aforementioned Volker Judgment (C-92/09 and C-93/09). 
116 See paragraph 74 of the aforementioned Schecke Judgment (C-92/09 and C-93/09). 
117 See paragraph 76 of the aforementioned Schecke Judgment. 
118 See paragraph 77 of the aforementioned Schecke Judgment. 
 49
As they constitute exceptions to the fundamental rights, grounds for interference are "to be 
interpreted narrowly"119 and "must apply only in so far as is strictly necessary"120. 
A limitation imposed on the rights in question, is justified only if it is "proportionate to the 
legitimate aim pursued"121 and "necessary in a democratic society" to attain a legitimate aim, 
and, in particular, that it is "proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued and [that] the 
reasons adduced by the (…) authorities to justify it are relevant and sufficient".122 The 
authorities "enjoy a margin of appreciation, the scope of which will depend not only on the 
nature of the legitimate aim pursued but also on the particular nature of the interference 
involved".123 
It is therefore necessary to examine whether any proposed measure does not "go beyond what 
[is] necessary for achieving the legitimate aims pursued, having regard in particular to the 
interference with the rights guaranteed by Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter".124  
It is apparent from the case-law of the Court of Human Rights that a measure authorising 
"so-called exploratory or general surveillance" would contravene Article 8 of the ECHR125. 
Similarly, "the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the power of retention" of data 
(fingerprints, biological samples and DNA profiles) "of persons suspected but not convicted 
of offences", which are "retained irrespective of the nature or gravity of the offence with 
which the individual was originally suspected or of the age of the suspected offender" and 
without restriction of time, "overstep[s] any acceptable margin of appreciation in this regard 
[and] constitutes a disproportionate interference with the […] right to respect for 
private life"126. 
ECHR case law: 
In Leander v Sweden127, the Court held that the storing of information relating to an 
individual’s private life in a secret register and the release of such information 
amounted to an interference with his right to respect for private life as guaranteed by 
Article 8(1).  
In Rotaru v Romania128, the ECtHR reiterated that the storing by a public authority of 
information relating to an individual’s private life and the use of it amount to 
interference with the right to respect for private life and added that such an 
interference occurred also from the refusal to allow an opportunity for the personal 
data to be refuted.  
In Amann v Switzerland129, the Court found that the storing of a card containing data 
relating to an individual’s private life and stored by an authority storage itself 
amounted to an interference with the right to respect for his private life.  
                                                 
119 Judgment of the Court of Human Rights, Rotaru, dated 4 May 2000, 2841/95, paragraph 47. 
120 See paragraph 77 of the aforementioned Schecke judgment. 
121 See paragraph 71, Schecke judgment. 
122 See paragraph 101 of the aforementioned Marper Judgment. See also paragraph 83 of the Österreichischer 
Rundfunk Judgment. 
123 See paragraph 83 of the aforementioned Österreichischer Rundfunk judgment. 
124 See paragraph 79 of the aforementioned Schecke Judgment. See also point 86, 88 and 90 of the 
Österreichischer Rundfunk Judgment.  
125 See paragraph 17 above and the penultimate subparagraph of paragraph 5 of the opinion of the Legal 
Service 10146/01.  
126 Marper judgment, paragraphs 119 and 125. 
127  Leander v. Sweden, judgment of 26 March 1987, para. 48.  
128  Rotaru v Romania, judgment of 4 May 2000, para 43. 
129  Amann v Switzerland, judgment of 16 February 2000, para 70. 
 50
In S. and Marper v. United Kingdom130 the ECtHR ruled on the lawfulness of the 
retention of fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles after criminal 
proceedings against the applicants were terminated by an acquittal or discharge and 
despite the applicants had requested their destruction. The retention of both cellular 
samples and DNA profiles amounted to an interference with the applicants’ right to 
respect for their private lives. The Court reiterated that as for the storing and use of 
this personal information, it was essential to have clear, detailed rules governing the 
scope and application of measures, as well as minimum safeguards. The protection 
afforded by Article 8 would be unacceptably weakened if the use of modern 
scientific techniques in the criminal justice system were allowed at any cost and 
without carefully balancing the potential benefits of the extensive use of such 
techniques against important private-life interests. 
The Court found that it amounts to a violation of Article 8 that fingerprints, cellular 
samples and DNA profiles could be retained by police authorities irrespective of the 
nature or gravity of the offence with which the individual was originally suspected or 
of the age of the suspected offender; if the retention was not time-limited; and if 
there existed only limited possibilities for an acquitted individual to have the data 
removed from the nationwide database or to have the materials destroyed. It 
expressly found that that the retention of unconvicted persons’ data could be 
especially harmful in the case of minors such, given their special situation and the 
importance of their development and integration in society 
5.2. Other standards (Council of Europe) 
Additionally, certain standards included in Recommendation No R (87) 15 of the Committee 
of Ministers of the Council of Europe are also useful benchmarks in this area, in particular: 
– The need to distinguish personal data according to their degree of accuracy and 
reliability, or whether they are based on facts or on opinions or personal assessments. 
The lack of such a requirement could actually undermine the data being exchanged 
between police authorities as they will not be able to ascertain whether the data can be 
construed as ‘evidence’, ‘fact’, ‘hard intelligence’ or ‘soft intelligence’. This could have 
the consequence of hampering security operations and of making it more difficult for 
courts to secure convictions; 
 
– The need to distinguish between different categories of data subjects (criminals, 
suspects, victims, witnesses, etc.), and to provide in particular for specific guarantees 
for data relating to non-suspects. Again, these distinctions are on the one hand 
necessary for the protection of the concerned individuals and on the other hand for the 
ability of the recipient law enforcement authorities to be able to make full use of the 
data they receive131.  
_________________________ 
 
                                                 
130  S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 4 December 2008, applications nos. 30562/04 and 
30566/04. 
131  Similar provisions are also included in the Decision related to Europol (Articles 12, 14) and Eurojust 
(Article 15), 
 51
LIST OF EU INSTRUMENTS IN THE FIELD OF POLICE AND JUDICIAL 
COOPERATION IN CRIMINAL MATTERS CONTAINING  
SPECIFIC DATA PROTECTION PROVISIONS   
(1) Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the 
Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of 
Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their 
common borders (OJ L 239, 22.9.2000, p. 19);  
(2) Council Decision of 17 October 2000 establishing a secretariat for the joint 
supervisory data-protection bodies set up by the Convention on the Establishment of 
a European Police Office (Europol Convention), the Convention on the Use of 
Information Technology for Customs Purposes and the Convention implementing the 
Schengen Agreement on the gradual abolition of checks at the common borders 
(Schengen Convention) (OJ L 271, 24.10.2000, p. 1); 
(3) Council Decision 2005/211/JHA of 24 February 2005 concerning the introduction of 
some new functions for the Schengen Information System, including in the fight 
against terrorism (OJ L 68, 15.3.2005, p.44);  
(4) Commission Decision 2006/758/EC of 22 September 2006 on amending the Sirene 
Manual (OJ L 317, 16.11.2006, p. 41). 
(5) Council Decision 2007/533/JHA of 12 June 2007 on the establishment, operation and 
use of the second generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) (OJ L 205, 
7.8.2007, p. 63);  
(6) Commission Decision 2008/334/JHA of 4 March 2008 adopting the SIRENE Manual 
and other implementing measures for the second generation Schengen Information 
System (SIS II) (OJ L 123, 8.5.2008, p. 39). 
(7) Council Act of 18 December 1997 drawing up, on the basis of Article K.3 of the 
Treaty on European Union, the Convention on mutual assistance and cooperation 
between customs administrations (OJ C 24, 23.1.1998, p.2). 
(8) Council Act of 29 May 2000 establishing in accordance with Article 34 of the Treaty 
on European Union the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters 
between the Member States of the European Union (OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p 1). 
(9) Council Decision 2000/642/JHA of 17 October 2000 concerning arrangements for 
cooperation between financial intelligence units of the Member States in respect of 
exchanging information (OJ L 271, 24.10.2000, p. 4). 
(10) Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest 
warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States (OJ L 190, 18.7.2002, 
p. 1). 
(11) Council Common Position 2005/69/JHA of 24 January 2005 on exchanging certain 
data with Interpol (OJ L 27,29.1.2005, p. 61) 
 52
(12) Council Framework Decision 2006/960/JHA of 18 December 2006 on simplifying 
the exchange of information and intelligence between law enforcement authorities of 
the Member States of the European Union  (OJ L 386, 29.12.2006, p. 89). 
(13) Council Decision 2007/845/JHA of 6 December 2007 concerning cooperation 
between Asset Recovery Offices of the Member States in the field of tracing and 
identification of proceeds from, or other property related to, crime (OJ L 332, 
18.12.2007, p. 103). 
(14) Council Decision 2008/615/JHA of 23 June 2008 on the stepping up of cross-border 
cooperation, particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime (OJ L 210, 
6.8.2008, p. 1);  
(15) Council Decision 2008/616/JHA of 23 June 2008 on the implementation of Decision 
2008/615/JHA on the stepping up of cross-border cooperation, particularly in 
combating terrorism and cross-border crime (OJ L 210, 6.8.2008, p. 12). 
(16) Council Decision 2008/633/JHA of 23 June 2008 concerning access for consultation 
of the Visa Information System (VIS) by designated authorities of Member States 
and by Europol for the purposes of the prevention, detection and investigation of 
terrorist offences and of other serious criminal offences  (OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 
129). 
(17) Council Framework Decision 2008/947/JHA of 27 November 2008 on the 
application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments and probation 
decisions with a view to the supervision of probation measures and alternative 
sanctions (OJ L 337, 16.12.2008, p. 102). 
(18) Council Framework Decision 2008/978/JHA of 18 December 2008 on the European 
evidence warrant for the purpose of obtaining objects, documents and data for use in 
proceedings in criminal matters (OJ L 350, 30.12.2008, p.72). 
(19) Council Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA of 26 February 2009 on the 
organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from the criminal 
record between Member States (OJ L 93 7.4.2009, p. 23). 
(20) Council Decision 2009/316/JHA of 6 April 2009 on the establishment of the 
European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS) in application of Article 11 
of Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA (OJ L 93, 7.4.2009, p. 33). 
(21) Council Framework Decision 2009/829/JHA of 23 October 2009 on the application, 
between Member States of the European Union, of the principle of mutual 
recognition to decisions on supervision measures as an alternative to provisional 
detention (OJ L 294, 11.11.2009, p.20). 
(22) Council Decision 2009/917/JHA of 30 November 2009 on the use of information 
technology for customs purposes (OJ L 323, 10.12.2009, p 20). 
(23) Council Framework Decision 2009/948/JHA of 30 November 2009 on prevention 
and settlement of conflicts of exercise of jurisdiction in criminal proceedings (OJ L 
328, 15.12.2009, p. 42). 
 53
As regards the processing of personal data by Eurojust:  
(1) Decision 2002/187/JHA setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight 
against serious crime (OJ L 63, 6.3.2002, p. 1);  
(2) Council Decision 2009/426/JHA of 16 December 2008 on the strengthening of 
Eurojust and amending Decision 2002/187/JHA setting up Eurojust with a view to 
reinforcing the fight against serious crime (‘Eurojust Decision 2009’) (OJ L 138, 
4.6.2009, p. 14). 
As regards the processing of personal data by the European Police Office (Europol): 
(3) Council Decision 2009/371/JHA of 6 April 2009 establishing the European Police 
Office (Europol) (OJ L 121, 15.5.2009, p. 37). 
(4) Council Decision 2009/934/JHA of 30 November 2009 adopting the implementing 
rules governing Europol’s relations with partners, including the exchange of personal 
data and classified information 
(OJ L 2009, L 325, 11.12.2009, p. 6). 
(5) Council Decision 2009/936/JHA of 30 November 2009 adopting the implementing 
rules for Europol analysis work files (OJ L 325, 11.12.2009, p. 14). 
 
 54
 
ANNEX 4 
 
SUMMARY OF REPLIES TO THE PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON THE COMMISSION'S 
COMMUNICATION ON A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH ON PERSONAL DATA 
PROTECTION IN THE EUROPEAN UNION 
 
 
Following the adoption of the Commission's Communication of 4 November 2010 on "A 
comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union" a public 
consultation was launched on the ideas therein. The deadline for replies to the consultation 
was 15 January 2011. The Commission received 305 responses, of which 54 from citizens, 31 
from public authorities and 220 from private organisations, in particular business associations 
and non-governmental organisations. The full text of these responses is available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/news/consulting_public/news_consulting_0006_en.htm, except 
where respondents asked to remain anonymous or to have their entire contribution treated as 
confidential.132 
This document provides a factual and objective summary of the contributions received during 
the public consultation. While the summary is structured along the issues identified in the 
Commission's abovementioned Communication, the views and opinions expressed are not 
necessarily those of the Commission. 
 
1. STRENGTHENING INDIVIDUALS' RIGHTS 
1.1. Ensuring appropriate protection for individuals in all circumstances 
The Commission will consider how to ensure a coherent application of data protection 
rules, taking into account the impact of new technologies on individuals' rights and 
freedoms and the objective of ensuring the free circulation of personal data within the 
internal market. 
 
- Coherence 
The coherent application of data protection rules was considered particularly important by 
large private companies, who insisted on having a coherent and uniform framework. Across 
industry, stakeholders felt that the current lack of harmonisation is detrimental to economic 
activity within the EU. Many stakeholders also pointed out that data protection rules should 
be coherent with existing sectoral regulation, such as the rules in the media sector (freedom to 
inform, journalistic rights and exemptions), the police and justice sector (specificities 
regarding access to data rights), the history and archiving sector (access to historical 
documents), the communications sector (security of networks, services and information), the 
health sector (collection of data for pharmacovigilance), and the research sector (recognition 
of scientific purposes as a substantial public interest, exemptions and safeguards for further 
processing of personal data). 
                                                 
132 288 out of the 305 responses are available on the website. 
 55
Many contributors referred to the challenges to data protection posed by technological 
developments, such as cloud computing or social networks, and urged the legislator to 
respond to these in a concrete and coherent manner. Some propose to introduce sectoral 
legislation to specifically address these issues (following the model of e-Privacy directive). 
Similarly, a number of citizens complained about the apparent lack of regulation of the 
internet as far as personal data is concerned. A consistent privacy experience online is seen as 
vital in order to have trust in the internet. 
Some stakeholders, including citizens, mentioned that a coherent application of the rules is 
only possible if definitions are clear, especially the definitions of "personal data", "data 
controller" and "processor". Some contributors suggested to change the current core 
definitions. For instance, some proposed to foresee that identification is not the only element 
in defining personal data and suggested to keep the personal data definition broad in order to 
anticipate possible evolution of new technologies and behavioural profiling. A group of 
researchers suggested to exclude from the definition of personal data any information whose 
processing does not interfere with the values of privacy, fairness and non-discrimination. 
Some DPAs wished to reconsider the categories of sensitive data by possibly moving towards 
a definition of the content which might be considered sensitive instead of prescribing an 
exhaustive list of sensitive data. A more radical proposal consisted of eliminating the general 
prohibition to process sensitive data and foreseeing instead a special obligation to ensure 
appropriate safeguards for such processing. Some public research institutions touched upon 
the need for further clarification and harmonisation of the existing definitions, especially the 
concepts of personal data, anonymous data and encoded data.  
 
DPAs insisted on the need for coherent enforcement mechanisms in order to ensure the 
coherent application of data protection rules. Some pointed out the need to make use of 
existing rules and strenghen self-regulation or self-enforcement. Indeed, a number of public 
authorities argued that the issue at hand is less the strenghening of rights but rather the proper 
application of the existing Directive. Other stakeholders, including business assocations, 
consider that in order to reach greater coherence of the data protection legal framework, an 
obligation of mutual recognition of the national data protection regimes between Member 
States should be introduced. 
According to some public authorities and citizens more competition between internet 
providers, and hence less dependency on providers with a dominant market share, could 
strengthen internet users’ self-determination and exercise of their rights. Currently, some 
services depend on a specific platform or there is no data portability (possibility for 
individuals to take their data with them when they move from one (social) network to 
another). 
 
Some DPAs felt the need to shift the focus of regulation from all data processing operations to 
risky data processing in order to take into account today's technological reality. Accordingly, 
rules for daily, harmless data processing (such as processing of an unstructured documents 
like ordinary email or publication of personal data in running text on the internet) should be 
simplified, by permitting such processing without any additional requirements, unless it leads 
to an inappropriate encroachment of the individual's privacy. The focus on the areas which 
involve specific risks would increase respect and compliance with the regulation.  
 
 56
In this context, some stakeholders expect the new legal framework to explicitly state that the 
right to data protection will sometimes need to be balanced with other equally important 
fundamental rights.  
1.2. Increasing transparency for data subjects 
The Commission will consider: 
- introducing a general principle of transparent processing of personal data in the legal 
framework; 
- introducing specific obligations for data controllers on the type of information to be 
provided and on the modalities for providing it, including in relation to children; 
- drawing up one or more EU standard forms (‘privacy information notices’) to be used by 
data controllers. 
 
Transparency 
Stakeholders generally agree on the importance of the principle of transparent processing. 
Many respondents, in particular businesses, noted that the notion of transparency is already an 
integral part of the present legal framework through Articles 10, 11, 12, 15 and 6.1(a) of the 
Directive. While some respondents argue that an inclusion of an explicit transparency 
principle would increase legal certainty, others consider it more important to reinforce the 
existing provisions.  
One citizen proposed a standard obligation whereby (online) companies should once a year 
send an e-mail summary of all personal information held linked to a given e-mail address. 
Another citizen proposed creating a special icon on internet browser screens to inform 
individuals about the data processing (e.g. profiling, behavioral advertising), indicate the type 
of information collected and the identity of the processor. A similar suggestion is submitted 
by a group of privacy experts. This system would enable consumers to know about the 
processing of their data and give a meaningful consent prior to the collection of tracked data. 
Children 
Citizens are generally very concerned about privacy risks entailed by childrens' online 
activities and support age verification and other controls or additional protection mechanisms. 
Several stakeholders insisted on clearly defining what a child is (age) and establishing 
specific requirements for the processing of children's personal data. One NGO argued that 
children should be able to exercise their own privacy rights (distinct from their parents) and 
that privacy notices and consent forms should to be adapted to the level of awareness of the 
child.  
DPAs and civil society organisations strongly agree that more consideration should be given 
to privacy-related children's issues. Some support additional legal provisions related to 
requirements for information provided to children, protection from behavioral advertising, 
categories of data which can never be collected, age treshhold, parental consent to be included 
in the revised legal instrument. By contrast, some others – pointing to the diverse rules for 
defining a child across the EU, different levels of maturity and understanding of children of 
the same age, as well as practical difficulties related to age verification and mechanisms for 
obtaining consent – do not support detailed provisions on children. Several respondents 
indicated that a gradual approach regarding the responsibility of the child should be taken 
based on different national age limits for criminal, administrative and civil responsibility.  
 57
Though some restrictions may be needed for children especially regarding sharing of 
information online and exposure to behavioural advertising, some contributors argued that 
teenagers sometimes have a better understanding of online privacy challenges than their 
parents. 
Privacy information notices  
Some organisations, in particular large companies, support a standard EU form as a practical 
means to inform stakeholders, while others would prefer general guidance based on best 
practices. Organisations that support the introduction of EU standard forms argue that the 
varying requirements across the EU regarding privacy notices create administrative burden for 
data controllers and little added value for consumers. 
Public authorities endorse the Commission’s view that transparent processing requires the 
availability to data subjects of clear, easy to understand privacy information notices. 
However, some authorities are not convinced that EU standard forms are the best way to meet 
this need due to the specificity of the context and possible particular needs of the data subjects 
at whom they are aimed. Therefore, some institutions propose to develop forms of general 
nature or forms which serve as recommendations or guidelines. 
 
The Commission will: 
- examine the modalities for the introduction in the general legal framework of a general 
personal data breach notification, including the addressees of such notifications and the 
criteria for triggering the obligation to notify. 
Data breach notifications 
There is general support that data breach notifications need to be extended beyond the 
Telecom sector and the e-Privacy Directive, especially from public authorities. Data breach 
notifications are seen as a key element of transparency and accountability. Information is 
crucial for the individual to exercise his or her rights, for instance to claim financial 
compensation.  
As far as the thresholds are concerned, respondents argue that a pragmatic approach should be 
foreseen, lessons from the experiences of the telecom sector should be drawn and 
overnotification should be avoided, in the interest of both businesses and data protection 
authorities. Some contributions highlight that data breaches in the public sector should be 
covered, as well as data breaches occuring in foreign countries, when they impact EU citizens.  
Industry argues that no administrative burden should be created for riskless / insignificant 
breaches. For instance, the banking sector argued that data breaches are already reported on a 
voluntary basis, where appropriate, and that an obligatory requirement should be limited to 
serious cases. 
 
Archives institutions argue that their special circumstances should be acknowledged; they 
consider it impracticable to attempt to ascertain the current contact details of the very large 
number (millions) of data subjects featuring in archives in the event of a data breach. 
 58
1.3. Enhancing control over one's own data 
The Commission will therefore examine ways of: 
- strengthening the principle of data minimisation; 
- improving the modalities for the actual exercise of the rights of access, rectification, 
erasure or blocking of data (e.g., by introducing deadlines for responding to individuals' 
requests, by allowing the exercise of rights by electronic means or by providing that right of 
access should be ensured free of charge as a principle); 
- clarifying the so-called ‘right to be forgotten’, i.e. the right of individuals to have their data 
no longer processed and deleted when they are no longer needed for legitimate purposes. This 
is the case, for example, when processing is based on the person's consent and when he or she 
withdraws consent or when the storage period has expired; 
- complementing the rights of data subjects by ensuring ’data portability’, i.e., providing the 
explicit right for an individual to withdraw his/her own data (e.g., his/her photos or a list of 
friends) from an application or service so that the withdrawn data can be transferred into 
another application or service, as far as technically feasible, without hindrance from the data 
controllers. 
Data minimisation 
Many citizens report a widespread practice of collection of excessive (beyond the specific 
purpose) personal information on the internet. They also expect more options to remain 
anonymous in the virtual environment.  
Public institutions, in particular DPAs and advisory bodies, agree with the importance of data 
minimisation, which can provide effective data protection, guarantee the rights of data 
subjects and promote best practise by data controllers. However, some respondents underlined 
that the principle should be clearly defined in order to ensure adequate implementation.  
Service providers and industry noted that data processing can be beneficial to consumers and 
in particular business sectors (e.g. finance, insurance) and business models and therefore, not 
all the personal data need to be minimised. Some industry representatives, including trade 
organisations, considered that the data minimisation principle is already expressed in the 
Directive. Some expressed concerns that the principle of data minimisation might conflict 
with other industry legal requirements to retain data for official legally sanctioned purposes.  
Some stakeholders in the service area (healthcare/advertising) fear that reinforcing data 
minimisation rules would lead to further restrictions on secondary use of data, which could 
restrict their professional activities. Also some business stakeholders fear that this would lead 
to additional costly anonymisation efforts. 
Civil society organisations argue that the data minimisation principle should become a 
cornerstone of any modern approach to data protection. Data controllers should think in terms 
of data minimisation at the very beginning of the design of products and services. Privacy 
organisations suggested that anonymisation could help to meet a principle of data 
minimisation. 
Improving the actual exercise of the rights of access, rectification, erasure or blocking of 
data  
Many citizens consider that they do not have enough control over their personal data put 
online. A number of respondents underlined specific dangers related to the publication of 
personal data (in particular pictures) by data subjects themselves - or the uploading by others 
 59
of, inter alia, slanderous images and sensitive data – on social networking sites. They 
emphasised the necessity to harmonise and strenghen the right of access to personal data by 
decreasing the legal barriers, simplifying compulsory procedures and formalities, facilitating 
the determination of applicable law in cross-border cases and strenghening the role of DPAs. 
A number of other contributors, in particular businesses and public authorities, argued that 
rights of access, rectification and erasure or blocking are already part of the existing legal 
framework and advocated that further detailing of those rights in sectoral codes could be more 
appropriate, so that they can be better enforced in practice 
 
A group of academics noted the need to reconcile data subjects' right of access and the 
freedom of private communications, citing as an example the personal data restrictions of 
university email use. They also encouraged considering a limitation to the right of access to 
one's personal data based on the ground of disproportionate resource burden. 
"Right to be forgotten" 
Several contributors stressed that the "right to be forgotten" and the existing right to delete 
one's own personal data are similar. Many stakeholders, especially technology companies, 
industry and trade alliances, service and content providers argued that the right to be forgotten 
is already explicitly guaranteed by the principles of purpose and use limitation and the right to 
erasure. These stakeholders therefore think that existing rules in this regard should be 
implemented better and their stronger harmonisation across the EU should be reached. 
Therefore, a clear distinction between the two rights would have to be made by defining clear 
requirements for the rights and specifying against whom the rights may be enforced. Most 
businesses also argued that the most fundamental challenge will be to define a "right to be 
forgotten" clearly, since it is not established or widely understood. 
 
Nevertheless, the right to be forgotten and the possibility to recuperate or delete personal data 
uploaded on internet websites was stressed as an absolute necessity by many citizens. They 
wished the legal framework to provide for such a possibility especially as regards under-age 
internet users.  
 
Industry alliances, service and content providers and legal and related 
companies argued that there should be exceptions to the right in some 
contexts and situations, such as preventing fraud or crime or for journalistic 
purposes. They were concerned that a right to be forgotten does not add 
value for businesses or customers and may cause industry to incur 
significant cost or administrative burdens. Service and content providers also 
noted that a right to be forgotten could negatively impact the services or 
products offered to customers. Some technology companies suggested that 
anonymisation can replace deletion as a means of protecting and enhancing 
this right.  
Service and content providers as well as international justice and trade organisations were 
also concerned that a right to be forgotten might conflict with other industry legal 
requirements to retain data for official legally sanctioned purposes. Stakeholders in the 
healthcare sector mentioned that they are sometimes obliged to keep patient data for a very 
long time, for example for the monitoring of undesirable effects of medicine.  
Some stakeholders highlighted that the right to be forgotten may also mean that consent 
should only be given for a reasonable and limited period, and that data should be deleted after 
 60
the expiry of such period. Some stakeholders specifically suggested introducing a mechanism 
of automatic data deletion after the storage period ends. Some public authorities and DPAs 
fear that the right to be forgotten could have a very limited application in practice and ask for 
clarifications on the extent to which this right can be effective and on its costs. The EDPS 
suggested that the right to be forgotten might only be a solution in a digital environment.  
Civil society organisations supported the right to be forgotten. However, they 
also asked for clarification as to the meaning and principles associated with 
a right to be forgotten and that the right should be of substance rather than a 
slogan with no meaningful benefit to customers or industry. Privacy related 
organisations noted that alongside the right to be forgotten there is a need to 
educate and raise awareness among data subjects that they have such a 
right which can be exercised. Consumer organisations noted that there is a 
need for such a right to be harmonised across the EU.  
Data portability 
A number of citizens have argued that they should be able to retain control over their personal 
data, including by moving it from one online application to another. Some stakeholders 
consider that data portability is redundant with the existing right of access. Others doubt its 
feasibility both in technical terms and as regards copyright and protection of intellectual 
property. Online service providers argued that user data should be clearly distinguished from 
data created by the service; in their view only user data could be portable. An alternative 
proposal was to introduce in the privacy notice mandatory information on what data can be 
retrieved from the online service and make this a voluntary practice. 
1.4. Raising awareness  
The Commission will explore: 
- the possibility for co-financing awareness-raising activities on data protection via the 
Union budget; 
- the need for and the opportunity of including in the legal framework an obligation to carry 
out awareness-raising activities in this area.  
Awareness-raising 
Some contributors indicated that the national DPA is the appropriate body to be tasked with 
awareness raising activities. Citizens in particular expect national DPAs to play a greater role 
in raising awareness of data protection norms amongst citizens and newly emerging data 
controllers who often have little knowledge of data protection compliance. 
There are diverging views on whether an obligation to carry out awareness-raising activities 
needs to be included in the legal framework. Some public authorities believe that Member 
States should take their own measures and DPAs should be allowed to choose their own 
approach. Some others note that awareness-raising is expensive and if this task is to be given 
to DPAs, it requires an explicit legal basis. Moreover, some DPAs suffer from insufficient 
funding in their Member State and welcomed any initiatives that would improve their 
financial situation. 
Some contributors argued that Data Protection should be a mandatory field of study in 
universities, for instance in fields of studies where the manipulation of sensitive data such as 
health data is inevitable.  
 61
1.5. Ensuring informed and free consent 
The Commission will examine ways of clarifying and strengthening the rules on consent. 
 
There is a general consensus among public authorities, DPAs and EDPS on 
the need to clarify the notion of consent to avoid the risk of misinterpretation 
and to apply the rules uniformly and consistently across the EU. The specific 
dimension of consent and the link to the purpose should be maintained. In 
their view, an opt-in approach is the most supportive of the right to privacy of 
data subjects vis-à-vis data controllers. Some DPAs expressed concern that 
always requiring explicit consent may be unworkable and present an undue 
burden on DPAs in ensuring sector-wide and industry compliance.  
A number of technology companies and industry alliances expressed support for a 
clarification of the definition and the rules around consent, but noted that the changes to 
consent should not negativelly impact business and industry. Several business stakeholders 
consider that consent may be implied from individuals' behaviour and note that requiring 
explicit consent in all circumstances could be detrimental to many business models and 
industry procedures. Some argue that a certain degree of flexibility as regards rules on 
consent is important in order to take into account certain business contexts (new business 
models, new technologies), social and cultural differences in understanding consent. Some 
contributors also highlight that privacy notices are not the best way to secure user's consent. A 
shared view among industry is that too much emphasis on consent will undermine privacy as 
individuals will become used to always agreeing to a stated purpose without necessairly 
understanding what is being asked of them 
Civil society organisations also supported an explicit, informed and opt-in 
approach to consent. However, some consumer organisations recognised 
that consent might be difficult to achieve and the need to explore the best 
possible way to ensure that consumers are aware of the consent they give. 
A need to raise awareness amongst consumers, and particularly children, 
about the consent and its implications in terms of their personal data was 
mentioned by many organisations. 
 
In addition, some citizens pointed out situations when the data subject is not in a position to 
give 'informed' and 'free' consent, such as a situation when the consent becomes part of a 
larger transaction or contract, "bundled" with a service sought by the customer, or the user is 
refused a service or charged a higher price unless he consents the processing of personal data 
or disclosure of such data to third parties. Some contributors proposed to oblige personal data 
controllers, whenever they intend to store or process personal data beyond the fulfilment of 
ordinary transactions, to explicitly specify those terms and conditions pertaining to consumer 
personal data and its compensation according to contract law, calling the result a "personal 
data contract". 
 
Citizens also mentioned the limited freedom to consent to personal data processing in the 
context of employment or unequal professional-consumer relations. 
 
Moreover, many citizens think that data subjects should be entitled to revoke their consent at 
any time and using online channels. The revocation should take effect immediately and not be 
circumvented by contract terms, refusal of services or higher price. Citizens also favoured 
opt-out by default from direct marketing services and placing the burden of proof on data 
controllers in opt-out cases. 
 62
 
1.6. Protecting sensitive data  
The Commission will consider: 
- whether other categories of data should be considered as ’sensitive data’, for example 
genetic data; 
- further clarifying and harmonising the conditions allowing for the processing of categories 
of sensitive data. 
There is a general consensus on harmonising the conditions related to the processing of 
sensitive data across the EU. Also many stakeholders support including genetic data in the list 
of sensitive data to be considered, especially pointing to the possible discriminatory use of 
genetic data. However, a big extension of the list is not favoured, several contributors 
preferring to stick with a short harmonised list of prohibited processing, allowing for some 
contextual exceptions. 
Some DPAs instead suggested putting more emphasis on the risk (e.g. significant damage or 
stress for individuals) that particular processing poses in particular circumstances while 
assessing sensitivity of personal data. Some public authorities highlighted that there is 
sometimes a need to process sensitive data, such as ethnic data in order to evaluate the 
benefits of some positive discrimination policies. Therefore exceptions need to be provided. 
The increase in biometric data is a common worry among citizens and respondents want it to 
be addressed in the new legal framework. One citizen underlined the lack of effective 
protection of health data in relation to new technologies in the health sector (e.g. ICT 
implants).  
A group of researchers noted that due to the broad definition of sensitive data many academic 
institutions are restricted in activities thay may carry out as the majority of social 
investigations involve the processing of such data. This practise may diminish academic 
freedom and result in loss of important forms of knowledge production. 
1.7. Making remedies and sanctions more effective 
The Commission will therefore: 
- consider the possibility of extending the power to bring an action before the national 
courts to data protection authorities and to civil society associations, as well as to other 
associations representing data subjects' interests;  
- assess the need for strengthening the existing provisions on sanctions, for example by 
explicitly including criminal sanctions in case of serious data protection violations, in order to 
make them more effective. 
Right to bring an action 
Some public authorities and citizens noted that present Directive offers limited help to 
individuals whose privacy has been violated and who need to obtain redress.  
A fairly large number of citizens asked to introduce the right of action for consumer and 
privacy associations extending injunctions for the protection of consumers' interest to data 
protection violations. Collective redress mechanisms empowering groups of data subjects to 
combine their claims and bring a single action against data controllers are supported by the 
DPAs and the EDPS. As far as civil society associations are concerned, some contributors 
fear that 'class action' style of actions would increase the cost of services. 
 63
Some businesses argued that out of court settlements and mediation by DPAs can be more 
efficient than judicial redress. 
Citizens emphasised the need to prohibit disadvantageous treatment of data subjects who 
exercise their rights under data protection legislation.  
– Powers of DPAs 
DPAs are in favor of strenghtening and harmonising their powers, an idea that is generally 
welcomed by citizens and privacy associations, whereas a number of business stakeholders 
argued that existing legislation gives sufficient powers to DPAs   
Sanctions 
Several public authorities considered that while administrative sanctions such as fines could 
be harmonised, they do not support the harmonisation of criminal sanctions as far as data 
protection is concerned. Others, however, argued that if the Commission considers the 
introduction of criminal sanctions, these should be a real deterrent to the unlawful trade in 
personal data and should be applied also against individuals who act maliciously. 
Some DPAs argued that the cost of reputational damage, is frequently higher than fines for 
companies. 
Citizens strongly supported a personal data security breach regime with strict accountability 
principles and corresponding remedies. Some underlined the accountability of manufacturers 
and proposed to introduce the liability for data safety in defective products as well as liability 
of data controllers for data protection breaches independently of their fault or negligence. 
Others supported the introduction of heavy criminal sanctions for systematic or reckless 
failure to meet the data protection requirements.  
 
According to some contributors the fines for data protection violations should be determined 
according to the scale and nature of the business of the data controller. Many citizens desired 
to see a fixed minimum compensation for victims of privacy violations established in the 
revised directive.  
  
 64
2. ENHANCING THE INTERNAL MARKET DIMENSION OF DATA PROTECTION 
2.1. Increasing legal certainty and providing a level playing field for data controllers 
The Commission will examine the means to achieve further harmonisation of data 
protection rules at EU level. 
Most citizens and many private stakeholders support further EU-level harmonisation of the 
data protection rules. Especially businesses operating in a number of Member States called for 
harmonised rules, which would simply their operations. Some business associations called for 
the mutual recognition of decisions by national DPAs. Some business argued that 
harmonisation can only be accepted if it does not lead to more stringent and burdensome 
rules. On the other hand, privacy associations argued that harmonisation and EU level should 
not lead to an overall reduction of data protection standards in the EU. 
According to one contributor the revised legislative act should be easier to understand and 
avoid excessively complex structure and terminology, as this may affect the implementation 
and help in gaining a wider public acceptance. 
2.2. Reducing the administrative burden 
The Commission will explore different possibilities for the simplification and 
harmonisation of the current notification system, including the possible drawing up of a 
uniform EU-wide registration form. 
Reducing the administrative burden is welcomed by most organisations and stakeholders, 
particularly businesses.  
Many DPAs see the existing notification system as administratively burdensome, requiring 
allocation of great resources for its administration and not accompanied by an equivalent 
improvement in data protection as notification are not necessarily useful for the DPAs' 
supervisory activities. Therefore, the majority of public authorities support either the 
elimination or simplification of the current notification procedure. One of the possible 
simplification options, proposed by some contributors, is to change the existing all-
encompassing general notification requirement to a more targeted system.  
One DPA noted that changes in the notification system could adversely impact the current 
fee-based funding model (i.e. not funded by their government but through notification fees 
paid by data controllers). The elimination of notification requirements is also strongly 
supported by a group of academics who perceive the existing system as entirely 
disproportionate and serving no useful purpose. 
However several companies indicated to the Commission that third party control and possibly 
certification (by the DPA or another independent organisation) is needed throughout the 'data 
processing lifecycle' (from the conception to the deployment, operations and later on 
dismantling) in order to guarantee a good level of privacy. They argued that self certification 
is ineffective, as many flaws in the data protection design may remain unnoticed.  
A comprehensive approach reviewing the notification of processing and the data breach 
notification would be welcomed by most stakeholders. Several stakeholders insist on the need 
to fully harmonise and simplify notifications, and introduce the proposed EU-wide 
registration system. 
 65
2.3. Clarifying the rules on applicable law and Member States' responsibility 
The Commission will examine how to revise and clarify the existing provisions on 
applicable law, including the current determining criteria, in order to improve legal certainty, 
clarify Member States' responsibility for applying data protection rules and ultimately provide 
for the same degree of protection of EU data subjects, regardless of the geographic location of 
the data controller. 
Some contributors proposed to improve the area of territorial application of the Directive, 
especially as regards multinational companies carrying out personal data processing in 
different Member States and companies established outside the EU but collecting personal 
data from EU citizens on a large scale. 
2.4. Enhancing data controllers' responsibility 
The Commission will examine the following elements to enhance data controllers' 
responsibility: 
 
– making the appointment of an independent Data Protection Officer mandatory and 
harmonising the rules related to their tasks and competences, while reflecting on the 
appropriate threshold to avoid undue administrative burdens, particularly on small and micro-
enterprises; 
– including in the legal framework an obligation for data controllers to carry out a data 
protection impact assessment in specific cases, for instance, when sensitive data are being 
processed, or when the type of processing otherwise involves specific risks, in particular 
when using specific technologies, mechanisms or procedures, including profiling or video 
surveillance; 
– further promoting the use of PETs and the possibilities for the concrete 
implementation of the concept of ‘Privacy by Design’. 
– Data Protection Officers (DPOs) 
There is overall support for introducing DPOs under certain threshold conditions among 
DPAs, public institutions and the EDPS. However, some DPAs noted the financial and 
administrative burden associated with mandatory DPOs and called for research to be 
conducted into this area seeking to minimise any negative impacts, especially on SMEs. Other 
DPAs noted that mandatory DPOs may not address the problems currently experienced in 
Europe due to a lack of expertise and skills as well as the specific nature of the problems. 
Industry organisations and companies in general preferred a voluntary and 
flexible DPO system as mandatory DPOs would impose a significant and 
unwarranted costs on some companies, particularly SMEs. While some 
service and content providers supported the use of DPOs perceiving them 
as key elements in order to demonstrate accountability, industry alliances 
were concerned whether mandatory DPOs will be more effective than raising 
awareness and standards for data protection within organisational 
structures, procedures and operations. Several industry representatives, 
including service and content providers, doubt that internal DPOs can 
realistically be independent, given that, as employees of the company, they 
have to help it achieve its business goals. Some industry alliances also 
worried that requiring mandatory DPOs could be an unwarranted intrusion 
into internal company's operations and procedures. 
 
 66
The majority of civil society organisations expressed the need for the role, 
duties, responsibilities and powers of DPOs to be harmonised across the EU 
as well as the mandatory requirement being consistently enforced within all 
Member States. Both consumer and privacy related organisations called for 
DPOs powers to be outlined, specifically to prevent DPOs from being limited 
to awareness raising and other education activities within organisations. 
 
– Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA)  
Data protection impact assessments (DPIA) are seen as very useful tools to 
reinforce privacy and are supported by many contributors. DPAs supported 
the use of DPIAs as these might lead to greater self-regulation in terms of 
protecting privacy and data. Furthermore, DPAs suggested that the use of 
DPIAs might be incentivised for companies by foregoing other notification 
requirements where DPIAs have been conducted and their results made 
public. A few contributors however are not yet persuaded of the need to 
introduce a legal obligation for all data controllers to conduct data protection 
impact assessments, in the absence of a proper assessment of the 
subsequent benefits and additional burdens for data controllers and DPAs.  
Civil society organisations overwhelmingly supported the use of DPIAs. They 
introduced some specific recommendations, for example, DPIAs should be 
used where sensitive data is involved and when new databases are created. 
Many organisations also noted that mandatory DPIAs might represent undue 
burdens for some companies of smaller sizes, and that these difficulties 
should be taken into account. Consumer organisations argued that there is a 
need for DPIAs to be harmonised across the EU and standardised across 
business sectors.  
A number of responses across the industry, expressed concern about the 
costs associated with mandatory DPIA’s for business and industry, in 
particular SMEs. Many respondents preferred a voluntary or flexible DPIA 
system, which provides incentives and is encouraged by national DPAs. 
However, some respondents agreed that a mandatory DPIA might be 
appropriate in the case of sensitive data. Some industry respondents 
suggested that DPIAs should be considered in tandem with requirements for 
DPOs. 
– Privacy by design 
Many citizens support the introduction of the privacy by design principle.  
DPAs also explicitly welcome the promotion of Privacy-enhancing technologies (PETS) and 
implementation of the concept of 'privacy by design', which could offer excellent prospects 
for strengthening accountability, security and individual rights. DPAs consider that the 
principle can be introduced without incurring any additional burden on the controller as such 
measures would focus on pre-establishing safeguards and mechanisms. Germany noted that 
privacy-by-design rules are already included in its legislation and argued that European 
privacy-by-design rules should not be too detailed to leave sufficient scope for different 
situations. 
 67
Data protection institutions from the third countries also strongly support the Commission 
communication's approach on 'privacy by design' and consider 'privacy by design' a 
significant standard for data protection internationally which will foster simultaneous 
protection and innovation.  
By contrast, many stakeholders from the private sector consider privacy by design too vague a 
concept and difficult to measure if it has to remain technology neutral, whereas public 
administrations generally support it and see it as an approximation to OECD and APEC 
principles.  
Some stakeholders underline that they would agree to privacy by design, as long as it is not 
understood as 'privacy by default'. Some stakeholders suggested the creation of some check 
lists, in order to assess the level of accountability and privacy by design. These check lists 
could be made publicly available in a register. 
2.5. Encouraging self-regulatory initiatives and exploring EU certification schemes 
The Commission will: 
- examine means of further encouraging self-regulatory initiatives, including the active 
promotion of Codes of Conduct; 
- explore the feasibility of establishing EU certification schemes in the field of privacy and 
data protection. 
 
– Self-regulatory initiatives 
Many sectoral private organisations supported the development of self regulatory initiatives. 
The majority of DPAs referred to the need of encouraging self regulatory initiatives. Some 
mention that a self-regulation system should guarantee the representation of the sector, be 
credible and ensure that self-regulatory provisions are up to date and relevant. Internal control 
of compliance systems should be introduced, but it should not replace a possible inspection by 
a DPA or its sanctioning regime. 
– Certification schemes 
Certification schemes are widely supported by the industry, several industrial companies 
arguing that products that are awarded a seal should have a faster access to the market, and 
that some of the administrative burden should be lifted for those products. The 'Europrise' seal 
is quoted as a good reference by several stakeholders. More than one citizen encourage to 
establish a European sign which could assure data subjects that data protection was carried 
out in accordance with the data protection standards. 
A few stakeholders argued that certification schemes should not be made mandatory, as this 
would create additional administrative burden. 
3. REVISING THE DATA PROTECTION RULES IN THE AREA OF POLICE AND JUDICIAL 
COOPERATION IN CRIMINAL MATTERS 
The Commission will, in particular: 
- consider the extension of the application of the general data protection rules to the 
areas of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, including for processing at 
 68
domestic level while providing, where necessary, for harmonised limitations to certain data 
protection rights of individuals, e.g., concerning the right of access or to the principle of 
transparency; 
- examine the need to introduce specific and harmonised provisions in the new general data 
protection framework, for example on data protection regarding the processing of genetic 
data for criminal law purposes or distinguishing the various categories of data subjects 
(witnesses; suspects etc) in the area of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal 
matters; 
- launch, in 2011, a consultation of all concerned stakeholders about the best way to revise 
the current supervision systems in the area of police cooperation and judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters, in order to ensure effective and consistent data protection 
supervision on all Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies; 
- assess the need to align, in the long term, the existing various sector specific rules 
adopted at EU level for police and judicial co-operation in criminal matters in specific 
instruments, with the new general legal data protection framework. 
 
There is general support among the DPAs and pubic institutions for extending data protection 
rules to the areas of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and for the 
harmonisation of any specific provisions considered necessary in this area. 
 
Law enforcement authorities should be subject to clear rules on the protection of personal data 
and they should be broadly comparable to the standards that apply in other sectors. However, 
as noted by several DPAs and national public authorities, special rules and derogations which 
duly take into account the specificity of the police and justice sector should be foreseen. Thus, 
specific needs of law enforcement authorities should be catered for within the legal 
framework (e.g. consent is unlikely to be readily forthcoming from those engaged in criminal 
activities). 
 
As regards harmonised limitations on data protection rights of individuals, they have to be 
necessary, proportionate and not change the essential elements of the right itself. The EDPS 
emphasised that the Directive currently applies to "law enforcement" in various areas (such as 
taxation, customs, antifraud) that are not fundamentally different from many activities in the 
area of police and criminal justice.  
 
In Eurojust's view, the new instrument should defined the general principles applying to all 
sectors while specific provisions will still be applied to the area of police and judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters. Given the specificity and sensitivity of the processing 
operations in this area, detailed tailor-made provisions would provide a higher level of 
protection than general ones. The exclusion of Eurojust and Europol from the scope of 
application of the Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA on Data Protection should be 
maintained. 
 
Voices from industry seek clarifications on how organisations can disclose data without 
breaching data protection obligations where data are requested from international or national 
law enforcement authorities. Moreover, clarity is needed both on the applicable law and 
jurisdiction question as well as on the process of responding to requests received from law 
enforcement authorities. 
 
Some contributions argue that the EU should not introduce data protection safeguards that are 
so restrictive that they might stop law enforcement authorities from protecting the public. On 
 69
the other hand, specific safeguards should be put in place in order to give data subjects 
additional protection in an area where the processing of personal data may be more intrusive. 
This is well ilustrated by citizens' replies who are worried about the amount of data collected 
by the police and law enforcement authorities and transfers of such data to third countries. 
 
4. THE GLOBAL DIMENSION OF DATA PROTECTION 
4.1. Clarifying and simplifying the rules for international data transfers 
The Commission intends to examine how: 
- to improve and streamline the current procedures for international data transfers, 
including legally binding instruments and ‘Binding Corporate Rules’ in order to ensure a 
more uniform and coherent EU approach vis-à-vis third countries and international 
organisations; 
- to clarify the Commission’s adequacy procedure and better specify the criteria and 
requirements for assessing the level of data protection in a third country or an international 
organisation; 
- to define core EU data protection elements, which could be used for all types of 
international agreements. 
 
Respondents from all of the different types of industry organisations 
recommended increased harmonisation, consistent enforcement and 
uniform application of data protection rules. BCRs, notification requirements 
and other administrative burdens should be reduced in order to increase 
competitiveness of European companies, however these reductions in 
compliance burdens could be offset by the creation of new regulations. 
Despite the concerns about compliance costs, service and content providers 
and technology companies all recognised that strong data protection rules 
can increase consumer trust and provide a competitive advantage. 
Responses from international trade organisations also argued that a lack of 
harmonisation across Member States and globally disrupts business 
significantly and a harmonised approach would support competitiveness and 
benefit all businesses. 
 
Several companies, industry organisations and service and content 
providers all note that any changes to the directive should promote 
prosperity alongside privacy protection and recognise that restrictions and 
administrative burdens could give business operators based outside the EU 
serving customers in the EU an unfair advantage in not complying with the 
regulations applicable to EU companies. This is particularly true in relation to 
developing new technologies or services.  
 
Like industry, privacy related civil society organisations stated that the EU 
data protection framework should be considered in a global context and that 
the EU should take a lead in dialogue surrounding cross border data 
transfers. Privacy organisations also argued that sanctions should be 
imposed on organisations that move data processing across borders in order 
to avoid the burden or costs associated with compliance of EU legislation.  
 
– Adequacy  
 70
Adequacy provisions are considered not satisfactory currently, as there is a need for 
clarification and streamlining. The current mechanisms are deemed to be bureaucratic, 
impractical, complex and not related to commercial realities. Cloud computing and the 
exponential growth in the use of the internet have moreover changed the nature and dynamics 
of international data transfers. 
The adequacy procedure as it is applied nowadays has been more a test of similarity or 
equivalence with the EU regime and has caused tensions with other countries whose 
enforcement mechanisms will naturally differ.  
According to the responses, the Commission should consider the possibility of granting 
sector-specific adequacy determinations, so that data of a certain type transferred to another 
country and subject to sector-specific laws or regulations may be found to be adequately 
protected. 
Adequacy assessments must focus on the outcomes of the regime being analysed and not on 
the list of prescriptive provisions in the legal regime. The procedure should move from 
prescriptive rules to a risk-based model of accountability with adequacy of specific transfers 
rather than of a country in focus. More attention should be paid to the competence and 
adequacy of the body handling data rather than to the territory where data is held.  
A recurring industry view was that adequacy should be replaced by the extension of the 
accountability principle to international data transfers. This would place the emphasis on both 
data controllers and processors to ensure that data is adequately safeguarded regardless of 
location.  
The adequacy procedure should be more transparent so that businesses can anticipate 
favourable determinations and put in place appropriate arrangements in advance. One should 
also study the possibility of carrying out sectoral adequacies, for instance to cover certain part 
of a third country data protection regime (for instance, only the banking sector, or only the IT 
subcontracting sector, for countries that have sectoral legislation) 
According to industry, controllers (in the context of accountability) should have the flexibility 
to make their own adequacy determinations. The revised framework should include clear 
criteria for controllers to guide them through this process. 
In industry's view data processors should be reflected in the proposal – a processor that acts 
on behalf of a controller should not be treated as a third party (of course if a processor applies 
EU rules for data protection). As well, contractual options should allow transfers from data 
processors to sub-processors, provided that their obligations under the Directive are passed on 
in contract. 
Representatives of the academic community also supported a much more flexible approach 
and proposed to implement a risk-based model which would be built on data controller's 
obligation to evaluate all relevant factors (e.g. the nature of the data, how long the data will be 
in the third country, whether the data will remain under the control of the data controller etc.). 
In this case they accept that data transfer can take place even in situations where the general 
legal regime governing data protection is not similar to that as within the EU, but reasonably 
effective in protecting individuals’ core rights and interests. 
 
A citizen working in the IT field, proposed to introduce a certification scheme as a measure to 
comply with adequacy requirements in the context of international data transfers. 
 71
Respondents argued that any international agreement between EU and a third country should 
reflect a high level of data protection. 
– Binding Corporate Rules (BCRs)  
Respondents argued that the authorisation process for establishing BCRs is currently 
inefficient: too slow, bureaucratic and complex. Thus, a clearer, more harmonised approach to 
BCRs is needed and direct reference to BCRs should be made in EU legislation. Recognizing 
BCRs as a suitable way of providing appropriate protection measures will give BCRs a status 
equivalent to standard contractual clauses. However, BCRs should be better adapted to 
modern practices (e.g. cloud computing). 
 
BCRs could easily serve as a more flexible and less formalistic approach to data transfers by 
means of robust internal policies and procedures and internal oversight and auditing.  They 
can constitute an alternative to adequacy. 
 
In respect of BCRs, the notions of both "accountability" and "group of companies" were 
referred to very often. BCRs provide a good framework for a variety of inter-group transfers 
for multinational companies. The prevailing opinion of the industry is that transfers within the 
same "group of companies" need to be radically simplified. They should also apply to data 
processors when transferring personal data (such expansion of scope would be beneficial to 
EU businesses). 
 
To make BCRs more attractive and effective, the mutual recognition scheme needs to be 
expanded to include all MS (for one single regulatory approval to have effect in EU-27). One 
stakeholder proposed a new approach to BCRs – creation of Binding Global Codes (BGCs) 
for multinational organisations built on foundation of accountability. They would take form of 
a set of binding rules demonstrating compliance with data protection principles on a 
worldwide basis. The Code would cover policies, procedures, technology and 
human/organisational issues, not just legal compliance, with clear governance arrangements 
and identifiable internal responsibility. 
 
4.2. Promoting universal principles 
The Commission will: 
- continue to promote the development of high legal and technical standards of data 
protection in third countries and at international level; 
- strive for the principle of reciprocity of protection in the international actions of the Union 
and in particular regarding the data subjects whose data are exported from the EU to third 
countries; 
- enhance its cooperation, to this end, with third countries and international 
organisations, such as the OECD, the Council of Europe, the United Nations, and other 
regional organisations; 
- closely follow up the development of international technical standards by 
standardisation organisations such as CEN and ISO, to ensure that they usefully 
complement the legal rules and to ensure operational and effective implementation of the key 
data protection requirements. 
In the majority of contributions, the Commission was encouraged to continue its work on 
promoting development of international data protection standards. However this should not 
 72
take form of simply imposing EU standards on third countries. Constructive and open 
dialogue is required.  
Current revisions of the EU, Council of Europe, and OECD frameworks should lead to ensure 
greater convergence and enhanced protection for individuals. 
Modernisation of cross-border transfer of data between law enforcement authorities 
constitutes one of the areas where international standardisation could be beneficial. 
A global harmonised approach towards data protection is deemed indispensable especially 
bearing in mind the growing popularity of cloud computing services. Some stakeholders 
called for a multilateral binding agreement within the G8 or G20. 
There were several references, especially in contributions from the industry, to the Madrid 
resolution as a good step in establishing common standards. 
Some contributions called for capacity building support for third countries to promote the 
development of data protection standards. 
5. A STRONGER INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT FOR BETTER ENFORCEMENT OF 
DATA PROTECTION RULES 
The Commission will examine: 
- how to strengthen, clarify and harmonise the status and the powers of the national 
Data Protection Authorities in the new legal framework, including the full implementation 
of the concept of ‘complete independence’; 
- ways to improve the cooperation and coordination between Data Protection 
Authorities; 
- how to ensure a more consistent application of EU data protection rules across the internal 
market. This may include strengthening the role of national data protection supervisors, 
better coordinating their work via the Article 29 Working Party (which should become a 
more transparent body), and/or creating a mechanism for ensuring consistency in the 
internal market under the authority of the European Commission. 
 
The majority of views are that the coordination between DPAs should be enhanced in order to 
achieve a harmonised approach within the EU. Some emphasise that the role and competences 
of DPAs should be clarified and harmonised across the EU. Strengthening DPAs' powers 
should imply being able to bring actions before court and have the power to impose sanctions 
on controllers. 
Only few contributions suggested that there is no need for strengthening the DPAs as they 
have already sufficient powers. Instead the enforcement of provisions by them should be 
improved. 
 
In addition, a wish for the enhanced cooperation not only between DPAs but also between 
DPAs and market regulatory authorities at Member States and EU level, for instance between 
the Art.29 WP and ENISA was expressed. The role of ENISA as far as data protection is 
concerned should also be clarified. 
 
As regards the full implementation of the concept of ‘complete independence’, the German 
Federal Government noted that Member States should be provided a way to reconcile the 
 73
concept of ‘complete independence’ for data protection supervision with their constitutional 
traditions. On the other hand, the EDPS referred to the decision in Case C-518/07 and insisted 
on the need to clarify the notion of independence of DPAs and suggested to codify explicitly 
the elements of the 'absence of any external influence' and 'instructions from anybody' in the 
new legal instrument. 
 
The role of Art.29 WP in this respect in clarifying DP norms and standards is generally 
perceived as vital. Many respondents (especially from industry) argue that Art.29WP should 
be more engaged with stakeholders from public, private and NGO sector through 
consultations before it reaches the decision or publish an opinion. There are many calls for 
greater transparency of Art.29 WP activities. Some private stakeholders and organisations 
support a single point of contact at EU level. 
 
In order to make opinions of the Art.29 WP more authoritative the EDPS recommended to 
include an obligation for the DPAs and the Commission to take "utmost account" of opinions 
and common positions adopted by the Art.29 WP, based on the model adopted for the 
positions of the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications in the 
Regulation No. 1211/2009. Furthermore, according to the EDPS proposal the new legal 
instrument could give the Art.29 WP the explicit task to adopt “interpretative 
recommendations”. 
 
The EDPS underlined a need to preserve and maybe improve coordination between the Art.29 
WP and the EDPS, to make sure that they work together on the main data protection issues, 
for instance by coordinating agendas on a regular basis and by ensuring transparency on 
issues which have a more national or specific EU aspect.  
 
 74
 
ANNEX 5 
 
 DETAILED ANALYSIS OF IMPACTS 
 
 
1. Policy Option 1: Soft action....................................................................................... 2 
1.1.1. 1.1. Problem 1: Barriers for business and public authorities due to 
fragmentation, legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement............................ 2 
1.1.2. 1.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal 
data .............................................................................................................................. 6 
1.1.3. 2. POLICY OPTION 2 - MODERNISED LEGAL FRAMEWORK................................... 7 
1.1.4. 2.1 PROBLEM 1 - Barriers for business and public authorities due to 
fragmentation, legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement............................ 7 
1.1.5. 2.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal 
data ............................................................................................................................ 15 
1.1.6. 2.3. Problem 3: Inconsistencies and gaps in the protection of personal data in 
the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .......................... 21 
1.1.7. 3. POLICY OPTION 3: DETAILED LEGAL RULES AT EU LEVEL ................................ 22 
1.1.8. 3.1. Problem 1: Barriers for business and public authorities due to 
fragmentation, legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement.......................... 22 
1.1.9. 3.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal 
data ............................................................................................................................ 24 
1.1.10. 3.3. Problem 3: Inconsistencies and gaps in the protection of personal data in 
the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .......................... 26 
 75
6. POLICY OPTION 1: SOFT ACTION  
6.1.1. 1.1. Problem 1: Barriers for business and public authorities due to fragmentation, 
legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement  
(see section 6.1.1, a) and c) of the Impact Assessment) 
1) Adoption of interpretative Communications by the Commission in order to clarify 
the existing rules 
The Commission would issue Communications to add more clarity on the interpretation of the 
provisions of the data protection instruments. While these Communications would not have a 
legally binding value, they would provide an authoritative and consistent interpretation of EU 
law, providing more clarity for both Member States and other stakeholders (data controllers, 
individuals) on key provisions of the Directive. However, the current practice with (non-
binding) Article 29 opinions on various aspects of the Directive has shown that the impact of 
such soft law on Member States' - and DPAs' – practice is quite limited. Furthermore, it needs 
to be taken into account that a Commission interpretation is not binding for the courts and that 
national courts and the ECJ in particular may come to different conclusions than the 
Commission. Therefore, interpretative Communications cannot sufficiently address the 
problem linked to the lack of legal certainty. 
2) Further encouraging self/co-regulation 
The Inter-Institutional Agreement on Better Law Making of 2003 (IIA) between the 
Commission and the legislator provides for the use of self- and co-regulation as alternatives to 
EU legislation and lays down criteria and principles to apply regarding these instruments. The 
Data Protection Directive provides for self-regulation by explicitly encouraging the creation 
of codes of conduct and the assessment of their legal compliance and their endorsement by 
supervisory authorities at national level or by the Article 29 Working Party at EU level. This 
procedure incorporates elements of co-regulation within the meaning of the IIA. 
Since the entry into force of the Directive, the possibility to have codes endorsed by the 
Article 29 Working Party has been used in a very limited number of cases133. In a fast moving 
economic and technological environment, there could be an opportunity for self regulation to 
become a more meaningful and useful instrument, so that the encouragement for EU level self 
regulation should be assessed. In 2008, the Commission published a study on self regulation, 
which provided recommendations and a check list for self regulation initiatives based on a 
screening of 61 self- and co-regulation initiatives in SANCO policy areas134. 
A successful self-regulation or co-regulation process is not necessarily of shorter duration 
than a legislative procedure. This is due to the fact that a meaningful agreement must achieve 
                                                 
133  As an example, see the European Codes of practice for the use of Personal Data in direct marketing by 
FEDMA, including an annex on online direct marketing: http://www.fedma.org/index.php?id=56. It took 
several years to  have the annex to the Code finalised, due to discussions with the supervisory authorities 
and WP29 (see the opinions issued, one in 2003 and one in 2010): 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2010/wp174_en.pdf and
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2003/wp77_en.pdf). 
  
134 Self-Regulation Practices in SANCO Policy Areas, 
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/self_regulation/docs/self-reg-SANCO-final.pdf 
 76
a balance of all relevant interests as must the ordinary legislative procedure, however, the 
actors in self-regulation are not subject to a similar mandate as the EU legislator and are not 
subject to similar time constraints and procedural deadlines. 
A self- or co-regulation procedure draws less on the resources of the institutions than a 
legislative initiative; it can be launched much faster than a legislative initiative, focus much 
more narrowly and provide much more precise rules than legislation, so that in the end it can 
make a considerable contribution to improving legal certainty for economic operators and 
more effectively protecting individuals' rights with respect to those activities and actors within 
its scope. It also may engage stakeholders more than the legislative procedure and may create 
a higher level of awareness due to their active participation in the process 
Effectiveness requires that such codes are monitored systematically and equipped with an 
enforcement mechanism which includes statutory enforcement of the underlying legislation as 
the last resort. 
Self regulation at EU level can only work properly when all participating actors have a 
common legal basis. Divergences in implementation and application of legal provisions 
between Member States make EU level codes of conduct unworkable or reduce their scope 
considerably. National level self regulation can only have limited effect for the EU Single 
Market as they cannot address cross-border issues; and in some cases it could contribute to 
making cross-border activities more difficult when national codes differ in substance. 
Stronger harmonisation of legal implementation and application of data protection rules may 
therefore be the key factor to increase the effect of self-regulation and lead to a broader use of 
this instrument in the data protection domain, but self regulation cannot address the lack of 
harmonisation itself. 
All in all, self-regulation at EU level, if it is accepted by all stakeholders and recognized by 
the competent authorities, may increase legal certainty and practical harmonisation for all 
stakeholders, but it can achieve this effect only when a clear and harmonised legal framework 
serves as a basis. It cannot, by itself, overcome fragmentation of national transposition, as 
evidenced by the current situation. 
3) Standardisation 
Standards developed by recognized standardisation bodies and addressing technological and 
organisational aspects of data protection could provide practical guidance for data controllers 
on setting up data protection compliant practices in their organisations. The well developed 
system of security standards and existing sectoral standards for privacy demonstrate the 
feasibility and the benefits of this approach. The standardisation process allows for the 
involvement of all relevant stakeholders and participation of DPAs, so that a broad reflection 
of all relevant views can be expected. 
Nevertheless, successful EU level standardisation requires that legal requirements are clear 
and consistent. Standardisation cannot solve by itself obstacles created by divergent 
requirements in Member States. 
 
 
4) Interpretative Clarification regarding DPA powers, resources and independence 
Considerable divergences exist with respect to the powers actually entrusted to DPAs for 
investigation and intervention, as well as their available resources. The Commission could 
spell out in more detail the requirements resulting from the current framework. Independence 
of DPAs is already enshrined in the current Directive and the recent ECJ case-law on the 
matter (case C-518/07) has clarified the requirements to ensure full independence. The 
strengthening of DPAs independence would allow them to better play their role in supervising 
 77
data protection legislation at national level, and decide autonomously their enforcement 
priorities. A Communication could outline the Commission's plans on how to ensure that all 
Member States comply with the Court's findings on independence and a time schedule. 
As regards independence, the legal conditions have been clarified by the Court and provide 
the Commission with a basis to assess DPA independence in all Member States and use its 
instruments to ensure full compliance of all Member States. More concrete information would 
help the Member States to prepare any adjustments of their national laws where necessary. 
As regards DPA powers and resources, an interpretative Communication by the Commission 
is not likely to have strong effect on national transposition legislation. Member States 
generally consider it necessary to adapt enforcement and monitoring systems to the overall 
structure of their legal, administrative and enforcement environment where no precise binding 
rules are provided by the Union acquis. Commission advice regarding resources allocated to 
DPAs may not have strong effect, given budgetary constraints in many Member States. 
5) Strengthened coordination tasks for WP29 vis-à-vis national DPAs and tools 
Under this option, the catalogue of tasks of the WP29 would be extended to include the 
provision of advice to national DPAs and the exchange and preparation of best practices. 
DPAs would have additional practical IT tools, to improve the exchange of information, 
cooperation and mutual assistance between them. This, together with the strengthened role of 
WP29 in providing advice to DPAs and the encouragement of staff exchanges between DPAs, 
shoulc help the development of more consistent enforcement practices across the EU. This 
would be beneficial to businesses, in particular, but also to individuals. 
The cost of three concrete elements supporting this enhanced co-operation are assessed 
below: 
• The cost of setting an IT system for collaboration have been estimated to be up to 
€ 2 million one off costs135, plus annual running costs of € 300 000 and additional costs in 
terms of human resources. The system would allow the secure exchange of documents 
between DPAs, and include a workflow to follow up that documents are reviewed and 
validated in due time if required for the cooperation procedures. Before setting up such a 
system, an in-depth analysis of the reusability of existing systems would need to be made, 
in order to minimize both initial and running costs; 
• A budget for a programme supporting exchange of experts between DPAs, in order for 
them to work better in a network and to reinforce cooperation should also be provided. 
Depending on the number of participants, it can be estimated empirically that between € 
500,000 and € 1 million per year could be devoted to an exchange program between DPAs 
(covering training, travel expenses and daily allowances of staff working in another DPA 
than his own). 
• The Secretariat of the Art. 29 WP would need to be reinforced to cover the additional 
work. A 30% increase of the Secretariat budget to cover the additional workload could be 
estimated; based on current costs for the workload of Art 29 WP, this would amount to 
about € 0.5million.  
6) Harmonised notifications forms – Single (online) platform 
                                                 
135  Based on the costs of other information exchange systems developed by DG JUST, such as the e-Justice 
portal. 
 78
The setting up of a central platform with an online form, whereby data controllers submit only 
one form and mark the countries they need to notify – as one of the options proposed by the 
WP29 in its Advice paper on the matter136 – would help reducing and simplifying the 
administrative formalities and burden linked to notifications. This would be welcome by 
Member States, as they could keep their current – differentiated – regime for notifications and 
exceptions/derogations. On the other hand, this option presents several shortcomings. 
The setting up of such a platform – be it by the Commission or by one or several DPAs - 
would be technically complex and costly, given the need to take account of the different 
requirements of the various Member States. For reference, the Commission has the experience 
of setting up information systems which provide for exchange of information between public 
authorities; such systems include IMI (internal market information system), Eurodac, the SIS 
system (information about wanted persons), the CPCS system, and the e-justice portal 
(information about the judicial system). Costs and implementation times of the systems vary 
greatly (time to set up from 18 months to several years, and costs from € 1 million to 
multiples of € 10s of millions, depending on the number of authorities involved, and the 
volume and complexity of the data). Experience shows that the complexity and cost of setting 
up such a system grows especially when the national laws defining how to collect and process 
the data in the Member states are not sufficiently harmonised, which would be the case in 
policy option 1. 
The added value of such considerable investment would be limited as it would only reduce 
part of the burden – i.e., it would reduce the paper formalities by providing a unique and 
centralised electronic interface – while leaving the current differences in substantial 
requirements and the related costs unaffected. This solution is unlikely to be perceived by 
stakeholders as reducing sufficiently the costs and the administrative burden linked to 
notification requirements. 
7) Legal amendments clarifying provisions on international transfers 
Clarifying and detailing the criteria for adequacy and providing a clear legal basis for Binding 
Corporate Rules (BCRs) – which have developed as a matter of practice, thanks to the input 
of WP29 - would bring more legal certainty as regards international transfers and would 
benefit data controllers and individuals as well as the third countries concerned. However, this 
would not address all issues raised by business stakeholders about the limits of the current 
BCRs model, i.e. on the length and complexity of the procedure, which often requires several 
authorisations at national level even when the BCR has been validated by the "lead" DPA.  
6.1.2. 1.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal data   
(see section 6.1.1, b) and c) of the Impact Assessment) 
8) Awareness-raising activities (information to individuals, particularly children) 
The Fundamental Rights and Citizenship programme will continue to fund awareness-raising 
activities related to data protection, targeting children in particular. Current funding (about 
€ 800 000 for the period of 2009-2010 under the Fundamental Rights Programme) could be 
increased by 25% in order to expand such activities further. 
9) Promotion of PETs, privacy-friendly default settings, uptake of privacy seals 
                                                 
136 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/others/2011_04_20_letter_artwp_mme_le_bail_dire
ctive_9546ec_annex2_en.pdf 
 79
The EU already promotes and supports the research and development of privacy enhancing 
technologies, privacy by design and privacy by default settings through research priorities in 
FP 7. More than 13 EU projects related to privacy enabling technologies are currently funded 
by the EU budget. An additional call for projects related to security and privacy has been 
published in July 2011 with a budget of € 80M137. Some additional funding for studies under 
the Fundamental Rights Programme could be envisaged to promote specific objectives, such 
as an "EU privacy seals for international transfers".  
These measures would provide support to increased application of the principle of "Privacy 
by Design" in the industry. As a recent survey carried out by the Commission has shown138, 
privacy by design is favoured by a large majority of the security industry who believes that it 
should be a mandatory obligation, 77% of the respondents from the industry would even 
favour introducing the privacy by design principle in the legislation. As regards sector 
specific trust marks and seals, they are generally viewed favourably by industry, but would 
not welcome a horizontal certification program. 
Continuing and strengthening current support through EU programmes will maintain the 
current level of engagement of stakeholders, mainly in research and technological 
development. However, as the experience from several years of this support shows, it does 
not create an incentive for broad endorsement in business practices when rolling out new 
commercial or public services. 
10) Introduction of explicit transparency and data minimisation principles 
The introduction of an explicitly stated transparency principle for the controller - while not 
adding specific additional obligations - would build on the existing provisions to provide the 
necessary information to the individuals concerned before the processing of their personal 
data not only in specific cases, but extend this to processing in general. This would strengthen 
the data subjects position as this would enable him/her to have more and earlier insights into 
the processing of his or her personal data provided by the controller in the specific case and 
lay the foundation for his or her consent (if and where necessary). 
It would equally strengthen the data controller in relation to the data subject as he would 
demonstrate upfront to the data subject his way of processing the personal data in question 
and thereby generate the necessary trust. While the implementation by controllers may 
generate some initial additional costs, these would be offset by the potential benefits for the 
controller controlling data flows and for the development of e-commerce.  
Data minimisation, i.e. processing and storing only those personal data that are necessary for 
a legitimate purpose, is becoming more and more important when technical limitations to 
storage, processing and transfer capacity are quickly disappearing, and when at the same time 
security risks and data breaches are becoming more prevalent. Security and data protection 
experts have underlined that data that is not stored or processed cannot be misused as a 
consequence of a breach. The principle is already provided for by the current provisions; 
however, it is not always fully understood how to interpret in practice. An explicit explanation 
of the principle in the legal instrument will provide data controllers with more clarity and 
improve the protection of individuals; and it will have no effect on legitimate data processing. 
It would strengthen the existing provisions on data quality, explicitly stressing that data 
processed should be limited to the minimum necessary in relation to the purposes for which 
they are collected and/or further processed. 
                                                 
137  FP 7, call 8, Objective ICT-2011.1.4 Trustworthy ICT 
138  Survey conducted in Q1 2011 by DG ENTR with companies representative from the security industry. 
 80
Explicit recognition of the principle would be beneficial to data subjects as they will not be 
exposed to excessive data collection, which will better ensure their protection. Also this will 
limit the negative impact of data collected while not necessary (e.g., function creep, 
reputational risk, aggressive marketing and surveillance). As regards the impact on data 
controllers, data minimization requires full understanding of the data one possesses in order to 
be able to delete with confidence. Data minimisation is a sound principle of data management. 
It helps avoiding data overflow and mitigates the risks in case of security breaches. Moreover, 
data loses its value over time, and it would reduce costs associated with the use of outdated 
data and increase compliance with data quality requirements. Finally, if data subjects do not 
feel that their data protection right is violated by excessive collection of data, e.g. for online 
services, consumer trust will increase, thereby potentially having a positive effect on the 
development of e-commerce. 
6.1.3. 2. POLICY OPTION 2 - MODERNISED LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
6.1.4. 2.1 PROBLEM 1 - Barriers for business and public authorities due to 
fragmentation, legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement 
(see section 6.1.2 of the Impact Assessment) 
1) Further harmonising the substantive data protection rules  
This would be achieved by a combination of measures, namely: 
a) Clearer and more detailed substantive provisions    
More precise and detailed rules would harmonise the implementation and application in 
Member States, thus greatly reducing the current cost of legal fragmentation (estimated to 
amount – only in terms of administrative burden – to almost € 3 billion per annum). These 
costs are incurred by economic operators processing personal data several Member States to 
which different national rules are applicable.  
Replacing the current Directive by a Regulation or by a maximum harmonisation Directive 
– together with a clarification of rules on applicable law and other simplification measures 
(see below) - would have the effect of eliminating most, if not all, of these costs and 
drastically simplifying the regulatory environment. The resulting economic benefits for the 
internal market would be considerable as: 
• In the short run, economic operators would no longer be faced with the disincentive 
of high legal costs when considering whether to expand their business cross-border. 
The enhanced legal certainty could therefore encourage greater cross-border 
investment within the internal market and also boost the competitiveness of EU 
economic operators internationally. 
• In the medium-run, more cross-border offers in the internal market would boost 
competition within the Member States, increase consumer choice, and hence put a 
downward pressure on prices. 
• In the long-run, savings in legal costs may result in more funds being devoted by 
economic operators to research and development, hence boosting innovation in the 
internal market 
• Also in the long-run, the streamlined regulatory environment with one set of clear 
and consistent rules applying across the internal market would make the EU a more 
 81
attractive place for business, for multinational companies considering expansion into 
the EU.  
This approach – and particularly the Regulation option, being directly applicable upon 
Member States without the need for transposition into different national laws - is strongly 
supported by the great majority of economic operators, which consider it essential to ensure 
the desired legal certainty and simplification within the internal market. On the other side, a 
Regulation would have an important impact on Member States, given the fact that most of 
them have developed an extensive and detailed national legislation implementing the 
Directive, covering both the private and the public sector.  
Additionally, entrusting the Commission with powers to adopt implementing measures or 
delegated acts in specific cases would increase consistency of the EU data protection 
framework. In particular, detailed harmonised rules could be adopted for specifying technical 
aspects that require uniform conditions of implementation (e.g. detailed security measures in 
various situations). 
The implementing powers to be given by the legislator to the Commission would follow the 
rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by the European Parliament 
and the Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing and powers139, thereby 
guaranteeing for a procedural involvement, whilst leaving the possibility for the European 
Parliament or the Council to be able at any time to indicate to the Commission that, in its 
view, a draft implementing act exceeds the implementing powers provided for in the basic act, 
taking into account their rights relating to the review of the legality of Union acts. 
2) Revising the rules on applicable law and on DPA competence (one single law and 
"one-stop-shop") 
In case of a Directive, the applicable law would be the law of the Member State of main 
establishment of the controller. In case of a Regulation, the EU legal instrument would be the 
single and directly applicable law across EU Member States. 
In both cases, the clarification and simplification of rules and criteria on applicable law, 
would be highly beneficial to data controllers with several establishments in the EU, as it 
would remove conflicts of application, provide more legal certainty and reduce existing 
unnecessary costs since the controller would shift from a distributive application of different 
national laws to a centralised application of a single legislation in all Member States140.  
In addition to the single applicable law, the fact of entrusting one single DPA with the 
competence to deal with a controller operating across the EU would respond to the strong 
demands for simplification and consistency of the current enforcement system, leading to a 
"one-stop-shop" for data controllers and processors. Together with the increased substantive 
harmonisation of the rules and the simplification of rules on applicable law, this would 
contribute to reducing the costs linked to fragmentation. Due to the much higher degree of 
harmonisation of the data protection rules the effective application of the “main 
establishment” principle – both for the applicable law (if it is a Directive) and for DPA 
competence - would not result in ‘forum shopping’ in favour of Member States whose 
legislation would be considered as less strict in terms of data protection requirements. 
                                                 
139  Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules 
and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of 
implementing powers, OJ L 055 , 28/02/2011 P. 013 – 018. 
140  Within the territory of the EU the need for more precision in the legal framework and a simplified criterion to determine 
the law applicable has been emphasised by the Article 29 Working Party in a recent opinion (Opinion 8/2010 on 
applicable law, WP 179). 
 82
From the point of view of the data subject, the impact would bring about equally legal 
certainty as to what rules apply to the processing of his or her personal data. And in any case, 
the data subject would retain the right to complain to a data protection supervisory authority 
of his/her choice (e.g. his/her residence). Strengthened administrative sanctions available to 
DPAs against non-compliant data controllers will contribute to ensure that individuals' rights 
are actually respected and enforced.  
3) Replacing notifications with a generalised basic registration system 
A basic registration for all data controllers would simplify formalities and allow certain DPAs 
to continue financing themselves with a fee-based system141. However, if the registration 
system would be a general requirement and not allow for derogations of the same level as the 
current notification rules, it would impose additional – albeit - reduced administrative burden 
to data controllers in those Member States that have made extensive use of the current 
possibilities for exemptions and derogations (e.g. Sweden, Germany). On the other hand, 
maintaining this kind of margin would again open the possibility of divergence in Member 
States, contrary to the main policy objective pursued (i.e. simplification and reduction of 
undue administrative burden). 
However, it would fall short of the expectations of the large majority of economic 
stakeholders for which this represents an (unnecessary) administrative burden, without 
providing any actual added value for the data subject. Indeed, DPAs themselves 
acknowledged that the current register – available at DPAs premises on the basis of 
notifications received - "is no longer the best and more appropriate way for individuals to 
understand what an organisation is doing with their personal data, and who to contact when 
things go wrong"142.  
If this system is estimated to cost 50% of the current costs of notifications to DPAs (including 
the additional burden in those Member States that largely exempt from notifications today), 
then it can be assumed that its overall cost would amount to approximately €65 million per 
annum across the EU.  
4) Notification of data breaches to DPAs and individuals  
Technical and organisational measures to ensure the security of the processing of personal 
data, appropriate to the risk connected to the processing and taking account of the state of the 
art and the cost of the measure, are already a legal obligation for data controllers under 
existing legislation, Directive 95/46/EC and Directive 2002/58/EC. Systematic monitoring 
and enforcement of these obligations is, however, difficult, as it would require a thorough 
assessment of internal conditions and procedures of the data controller by the enforcement 
authority. In practice, inadequate security measures are only discovered in cases where 
breaches of security occur and come to the knowledge of the authorities of the public. 
In some jurisdictions, obligations to notify security breaches which compromise personal data 
have been introduced. Experience has shown that these obligations have indeed a positive 
effect on data security measures taken by data controllers. This is due to a number of reasons: 
breach notifications provide a systematic feedback about the actual risk and the actual 
weaknesses of existing security measures; they enable authorities and consumers to assess the 
                                                 
141  This concerns, in particular, the UK DPA (ICO), which is currently exclusively funded by notification fees. ICO argues 
that a fee-based funding model is the application of the ‘polluter pays’ principle (in that those processing personal data 
are the ones who make it necessary for there to be a system of supervision, regulation and advice and guidance services 
provided by data protection authorities, and they therefore are the ones who should pay for it). 
142  See Advice Paper of WP29 on notifications, p.6. 
 83
relative capabilities of data controllers with respect to data security; they force data controllers 
to assess and understand their own situation regarding security measures. Data security issues 
become relevant for the management level of an organisation, which may be even further 
encouraged to apply systematic procedures by the objective to avoid reputational damage in 
the case of an avoidable breach. 
Member State legislators and administrations have started to implement notification 
obligations for data breaches. In order to avoid diverging Member State rules, the Union has 
to provide for a harmonised system of breach notifications across the EU. As a first step, a 
breach notification obligation was introduced with the review of the electronic 
communications framework in the e-Privacy Directive. As requested by the European 
Parliament, the current review of the general data protection framework is now the 
opportunity to create an all encompassing obligation to notify personal data breaches. 
Under the e-Privacy Directive, all personal data breaches occurring at providers of electronic 
communications services have to be notified to the competent national authority. In addition, 
breaches that are likely to adversely affect the privacy or personal data of individuals are to be 
notified to these individuals concerned. A recital of the amending Directive lists cases that are 
considered examples for creating adverse effects, i.e. if the breach may lead to identity theft 
or fraud, physical harm, significant humiliation or damage to reputation. The Directive 
empowers the Commission to adopt implementing measures on the circumstances, format and 
procedures of breach notifications in a comitology procedure, including stakeholder 
involvement and consultation of ENISA, the EDPS and the Article 29 Working Party. 
US experience – as well as the responses from stakeholders – suggests that the definition of 
the threshold for notification to the data subjects is a key factor to determine the immediate 
cost impact of breach notification obligations on data controllers, including the administrative 
burden. The proper setting of this threshold is also necessary to achieve the intended effect on 
improving the protection of individuals with regard to possible misuse of their personal data. 
If the criteria are set too strict and the threshold too high, data subjects may not be informed 
about breaches concerning their data and may lose the opportunity to protect themselves 
against damaging consequences. If the threshold is set too low and criteria are too lose, data 
subjects might receive many notifications that do not actually require any action from their 
side. This could lead to a so-called notification fatigue, with the result that data subjects do 
not pay attention to notifications and miss cases that would require action on their part. 
This is why following the same approach as in the e-Privacy Directive - i.e. defining the core 
elements of the notification system and leaving the definition of details on circumstances 
(including criteria to assess the likelihood of adverse effects), procedures and formats to 
Commission implementing measures, appears as the best solution to ensure consistency 
across sectors. When the amendments of the ePrivacy Directive were discussed, the EU 
legislator chose this approach as it found that the use of implementing measures allowed more 
detailed, precise and flexible rules than could be integrated in the basic legal act itself. These 
considerations were conducted with a broader application than the electronic communications 
sector in mind, as the legislator also noticed that data breaches in some other areas, in 
particular online business, could result in similar or even more serious damage than in that 
sector. An additional advantage of technical implementing measures would be that they 
would allow for differentiation of sectors where appropriate, what would not be possible 
within the sector agnostic general data protection instrument. Implementing measures would 
allow for a comparably fast and easy way to adjust rules based on experience with first 
practical application of breach notification rules in the EU and to ensure that its practical 
application can remain in line with technological development.  
Notably, the experiences with breach notifications in the electronic communications sector 
could be fully exploited for a more general solution. It results that the approach of leaving the 
 84
definition of details regarding circumstances, formats and procedures of notifications to 
implementing measures is more effective regarding the achievement of the political objectives 
of simplification and improving individuals' exercise of their rights that the attempt to provide 
for full details in the basic act. The approach also allows for better involvement of 
stakeholders and better balancing of the different interests at stake. 
While the legal instrument should provide for the possibility of defining details of breach 
notifications through implementing measures, it must set certain basic characteristics of the 
procedures by itself. It has been suggested in particular that setting a more precise time frame 
for a notification could provide more legal clarity to data controllers and reassure data 
subjects. While the ePrivacy Directive provides that notifications should be made without 
undue delay, a 24-hour deadline to notify the supervisory authority, where feasible, , from the 
establishment of the breach and the identification of who is affected s could be expected to 
provide more precision.  
The impact of such a concrete deadline needs to be assessed. Firstly, it needs to be clarified 
which event should trigger the start of the time interval. Such an event would be the detection 
of the breach by the data controller. To be more precise, it would be the moment when the 
data controller records in its files that an event that triggered a first investigation has been 
identified as a personal data breach. This event could be a security breach discovered in-
house, or an alert received from an outside entity. It should be noted that the actual breach 
itself may have taken place much earlier, or may have been ongoing for a while before it was 
detected. Secondly, it should be considered that a notification is the more useful the more 
precise and comprehensive information about the nature of the breach and the data concerned 
can be provided. A 'quick and dirty' notification rushed out to meet a deadline, which then 
requires updates and corrections will cause more insecurity concern and loss of confidence of 
data subjects than it provides benefits to users. Thirdly, the notification can only be provided 
if the individuals concerned and a workable channel for the communication of the notification 
have been identified. Fourthly, as already recognized by the amended ePrivacy Directive, the 
breach may require additional criminal and forensic investigations which could be 
compromised if the general public, including the perpetrators, receives early information 
about the detection of the breach. Any deadline for notifying a breach must in practice 
consider these elements and should not create an incentive for the data controller to delay the 
recognition and recording of a breach in order to avoid consequences of a formally delayed 
notification.  
Nevertheless, the legal instrument could provide the clarification that a first notification of the 
detection of a personal data breach should be delivered to the competent authority, where 
feasible, within 24 hours after the establishment of the breach, followed where appropriate by 
more detailed information as it becomes available. The data controller shall provide the 
competent authority on its request with the precise reasons if the delay exceeds 24 hours. 
Individuals would only be notified, without undue delay, where the data breach is likely to 
adversely affect the protection of the personal data or privacy of the data subject. This would 
ensure that "over-notification" – even when there is no harm to the individual - is avoided. As 
regards criteria for determining the seriousness of a breach, it should be taken into account 
that quantification is generally not possible due to the vast differences of breach cases that can 
occur. The number of individuals concerned by a breach cannot be used as a severity 
criterion, as the possible risk for any individual is not dependent from the number of others 
that are concerned by the same incident. In some circumstances damage may even be ore 
likely when less individuals are concerned, e.g. if a hacker obtains only a few credit card 
records, each one may have a much higher probability to be used for fraud than when several 
million records are stolen. 
 85
Annex 9 estimates the cost of this measure in terms of administrative burden to amount to € 
20 million per annum, based on UK figures and extrapolating from those for the rest of the 
EU, factoring in a cost of € 400 per notification. 
5) Strengthened and simplified rules on international transfers 
Simplifying the rules on international transfers would generally have a positive impact both 
on relations with third countries and on non-EU businesses and will boost the competitiveness 
of EU economic operators internationally, as they will find it easier to transfer personal data 
outside of the EU. In particular (in addition to measures foreseen in Policy Option 1, see 
above): 
• Giving the Commission a monopoly on adequacy findings would reduce uncertainty and 
inconsistency that would arise from potentially contradictory decisions from Member 
States, which are both prejudicial to data controllers; 
• Abolishing the system of prior authorisations in Member States when standard tools (e.g. 
contractual clauses or BCRs) are used, would also be beneficial to data controllers as it 
would shorten and simplify the procedure for authorising a transfer, thus reducing costs; 
• Extending the use of BCRs to "data processors and "groups of undertakings", together 
with the simplification of the procedure of "mutual recognition" between DPAs, would 
extend and facilitate their use, while at the same time ensuring a high level of data 
protection. This would considerably reduce the time (currently 6 months to 2 years) and 
the money spent on – nowadays - long and burdensome procedures (up to € 1 million for 
large companies as reported in the course of the public consultation by some of these 
companies with BCR experience).  
• Allowing data controllers, under certain circumstances, to conduct their own assessment 
under their responsibility - and adducing appropriate safeguards - as regards specific 
transfers will increase flexibility. 
6) New governance system – Better monitoring and enforcement 
a) Strengthening national DPAs  
The strengthening of DPAs independence would be highly beneficial to data subjects, as it 
would help them exercise their data protection rights: DPAs would have more powers and 
resources to investigate complaints, assist individuals in having access to their data etc. Data 
controllers are also likely to benefit since DPAs will have more resources to provide advice 
and assistance to them.  
The harmonisation of tasks and powers of DPAs is essential to ensure that they can 
effectively perform their monitoring and investigation tasks, as well as for the proper working 
of the cooperation and consistency mechanism described below. 
As regards costs, the requirement of providing DPAs with sufficient resources to be able to 
fulfil their tasks would require additional financial means for some Member States. This 
additional cost is difficult to estimate in general, given the current differences in the size, 
available resources, means of funding, tasks and powers of national DPAs. It is likely that the 
costs will be higher for smaller Member States and/or those Member States where DPAs have 
limited resources at the moment, taking into account that the abolition of notification 
requirements will freed resources. 
Ensuring proper resources for DPAs is also key to ensure good cooperation between them. 
Some DPAs face recurrent financial difficulties, limiting their ability to cooperate with others.  
 86
b) Strengthening cooperation and mutual assistance between DPAs –Mutual recognition of 
decision and "consistency mechanism" 
Together with the revision of provisions on applicable law (see above), these measures would 
further enhance the internal market dimension of data protection, increase harmonisation 
and legal certainty and reduce the current costs linked to fragmentation and inconsistent 
enforcement.   
As regards the impact on Member States’ data protection authorities, they will no longer have 
a direct role in cases where the data controller's main establishment would be in another 
Member States and thus outside their direct supervision. However, they would remain 
competent to supervise the implementation of the data protection legislation on the territory of 
their Member State e.g. to verify and intervene on a processing operation that is taking place 
on its territory by a controller with a main establishment in another Member State. This would 
have to be done in close coordination with the supervisory authority in that Member State, 
which would take a final decision against the controller. This decision would have to be 
enforced by all concerned DPAs on their own territory. 
The new cooperation and consistency mechanism between DPAs will ensure that their 
concerns are taken into account as they would be able to intervene in cases concerning their 
citizens and or affecting their country. The strengthened role of the Commission would ensure 
the overall consistency and compliance with EU rules on data protection.  
This mechanism would also entail additional costs (including administrative burden) for: 
• National DPAs, as they would need to foresee additional resources to adequately 
cooperate and exchange information with other DPAs, in particular to: 
• Carry out checks, inspections and investigations as a result of requests from DPAs 
in other Member States, as part of the mutual assistance mechanism established; 
• Have additional staff and mechanisms in place to investigate enforcement requests 
from DPAs in other Member States; 
• enforcement of the decisions taken by DPAs in other Member States as part of the 
"one-stop shop" system of supervision 
It is expected that DPAs will need at minimum 2 or 3 staff members working for the 
EU cooperation to ensure a proper functioning of the proposed consistency mechanism. 
This may pose problems for the DPAs of small Member States, whose financial and 
human resources are already more scarce. On the other hand there is a trade-off, as 
parallel procedures by several DPAs will be eliminated by the clear assignment of a 
single DPA for the controller. It is difficult to establish the balance between these 
effects as this will depend very much on the current size and resources of DPAs, the 
cases they will have to be involved in etc. 
• The EU budget, since additional human, financial and technical resources should be 
foreseen to:  
a) Handle notifications of cases handled by DPA that have a European impact.  In other 
policy areas similar mechanisms (e.g. telecom, technical standards), require between 
15 and 20 staff to handle the notification system managed by the Commission, 
together with adequate technical means (databases, communication system, 
translations etc). The data protection consistency mechanism requires resources 
particularly from the EDPS, which will provide the secretariat of the European Data 
Protection Board and operate the IT system required for quick and standardised 
communication between national DPAs and the Board. Together with the general 
 87
tasks of the board secretariat, these tasks will require 10 FTE posts (in addition to the 
EDPB Chair).  Overall, the EDPS budget will have to be increased by approximately € 
3 million on average for the first six years of operation. 
b) Establish an information exchange system to facilitate communication between DPAs, 
the Commission and the European Data Protection Board which will be replacing 
the WP29. 
(see section 6.1.2, b) of the Impact Assessment) 
6.1.5. 2.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal data   
7) Clarifying substantive rules  and key concepts 
a) Definition of personal data (online identifiers): 
A recent study143 analysing case law relating specifically to IP addresses found that in the vast 
majority of cases analysed the courts had identified these identifiers as personal data in the 
cases under decision, by applying the interpretation provided in recital 26 of the data 
protection directive on whether or not a person is identifiable. In 84% of the relevant 48 cases 
courts considered IP addresses personal data on the basis that they relate to an identifiable 
individual, in particular when the data controller has the intention to identify the individual, 
when other data elements were present that made identification easier or when the court 
applied a principle of caution regarding identifiability. The interpretation of identifiability 
depends to some extend on how the national legislator has used the explanation provided in 
recital 26 in its national legislation. Several Member States have integrated the explanation of 
identifiability in the national legislation as part or the definition of personal data, thus 
providing a more stringent basis to national courts than the Directive itself. Differences in 
national interpretation regarding online identifiers can accordingly be explained to some 
degree by differences in national transposition laws, which also include other modifications of 
the definition144. By moving the explanation of the term 'identifiable person' from the recital 
to a substantive provision and by further clarifying the related recital, diverging interpretation 
will be avoided and more harmonised interpretation ensured. 
This will have a beneficial impact on individuals, which will have enjoyed increased and 
effective protection of their personal data across all Member States.  
In order to assess the impact of these clarifications on data controllers, it must be taken into 
account that no substantial change of the legal situation is envisaged, but a clarification of 
existing rules. Data controllers are not faced with new obligations, but with a clarification of 
existing already applicable law. Considering the Article 29 WP has already for a long time 
recommended to treat online identifiers as personal data as concerns the rules applied to their 
processing145, those data controllers who followed this advice would not have to take any 
additional measures and would thus not experience any changes of their processing and not 
suffer any additional costs of administrative requirements. This interpretation has recently 
been confirmed by the ECJ in its ruling of 24 November 2011146. 
                                                 
143  Timelex study on case-law regarding IP addresses […] 
144  [Examples to be added] 
145  Art 29 opinion on Internet of /19992000 
146  ECJ judgment in Case C-70/10 Scarlet Extended SA v Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM).
 
 88
b) Definition and modalities of consent 
As also pointed out in the opinion adopted by WP29 on consent, it seems essential to clarify 
that valid consent requires the use of mechanisms that leave no doubt of the data subject’s 
intention to consent, while making clear that – in the context of the on-line environment - the 
use of default options which the data subject is required to modify in order to reject the 
processing ('consent based on silence') does not in itself constitute unambiguous consent. This 
would give individuals more control over their own data, whenever processing is based on 
his/her consent. As regards impact on data controllers, this would not have a major impact as 
it solely clarifies and better spells out the implications of the current Directive in relation to 
the conditions for a valid and meaningful consent from the data subject.   
In particular, to the extent that 'explicit' consent would clarify – by replacing "unambiguous" 
– the modalities and quality of consent and that it is not intended to extend the cases and 
situations where (explicit) consent should be used as a ground for processing, the impact of 
this measure on data controllers is not expected to be major.  
The current requirement for unambiguous' consent has been translated in the various 
languages quite differently (in some cases even with the word 'explicit'147) and subject to a 
variety of interpretations. 'Explicit' consent ensures, on the other hand, that consent is clearly 
expressed by the individual concerned – not necessarily and not solely in writing, it is not the 
purpose of imposing one specific modality - where consent is required as a legal ground for 
processing personal data. Additional legal certainty would be provided by specifying in a 
recital that consent must result at least from a "clear affirmative action" of the data subject 
and that data controllers must be "in a position to demonstrate that consent has been 
obtained". This is, on substance, in line with WP29 opinion on consent148.  
Individuals would greatly benefit from the clarification of consent and from a strengthening 
of the modalities for consent, as this would allow them to be more aware that they indeed 
indicate their wishes in relation to the processing of their personal data and better informed 
about what they are consenting to ‘ex ante’, if consent is required. They would also be 
enabled to ask the controller ex-post for a proof of their consent in cases where they contest 
having given their consent or the extent of their consent. Thus the control of the data subject 
over their own data would be strengthened. 
As regards controllers, this can bring significant benefits in terms of responsibility and the 
effective protection of personal data, as it is made sure that only consent that is construed in a 
solid way is taken as such and can be relied upon by controllers. 'Explicit' consent helps the 
controller to demonstrate that the individual has given his/her consent and to comply with 
their burden of proof. This would enhance legal certainty also for the controller that he could 
rely on the individual's consent has a legal ground for processing his/her personal data.   
What is also important to clarify is that consent cannot be a valid ground for processing when 
there is a clear imbalance between the data controller and the data subjects (e.g. in the 
employment context). 
The administrative burden linked to this obligation is included in the estimate for measuring 
the general obligation for the controller to demonstrate compliance with data protection law 
(see Annex 9). 
c) Data portability 
The possibility to move data from one service provider to another would increase competition 
in some sectors, e.g. between social networks, and could also make data protection an element 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
147  For example, in the Greek version of the Directive and in EL national law. 
148   
 89
in this competition, when users decide to move away from a service they do not consider 
appropriate in terms of data protection. 
Given that the transfer of data about users is usually already possible through other interfaces, 
e.g. for third party application developers or for exchanges with affiliated companies, the 
costs for implementation are minimal. In fact, use of existing interfaces for these purposes 
may allow the development of portability functions very quickly. 
d) "Right to be forgotten"  
The clarification of the right to be forgotten would strengthen users' control on their own data 
by enabling individuals to decide whether or not to share personal information as well as to 
impede the continued use of their data by data controllers, data processors or third parties. 
The adverse effect of data retained and retrieved after a long time has lapsed (e.g. in 
employment area, where a prospective employer may be prevented from hiring someone on 
the basis of information on political opinions which may have changed in the meantime) 
would be avoided. 
Therefore, the reinforcement of the right to be forgotten would greatly benefit the data 
subjects, especially (but not exclusively) in online environments, such as social networks or 
cloud computing platforms: the data subject's right to remove his/her personal data from such 
a service would be more clearly stated in data protection rules. 
As far as the data controllers are concerned, as with data minimisation, the right to be 
forgotten will avoid the retention of data that are outdated and often useless for the data 
controller. Another advantage is that this will stimulate innovation in this area.  
On the other hand, this right, if it is carried out in an automatic way will imply some 
technological changes, necessary to affix an "expiry date" on data or sets of data. This will 
involve costs for data controllers.  
The "right to be forgotten" will, however, not apply to activities subject to exemptions and 
derogations provided for under the provisions for processing for private purposes ("household 
exemption") and under processing for journalistic and literary purposes; it would therefore be 
ensured that the right to be forgotten does not affect freedom of expression and is used by 
individuals to attempt to alter or disappear from the public record. The media's role in keeping 
such public record will therefore not be affected. 
e) Adding genetic data to the category of sensitive data  
The explicit inclusion of genetic data as a special category of personal data requiring specific 
safeguards (“sensitive data”) would bring about an important positive impact for individuals 
as it would address the particular concern that genetic data is properly and securely dealt with 
in all Member States. Equally, the harmonised approach would bring about positive impacts 
for those controllers who process genetic data as they could enjoy legal certainty for this 
processing in all Member States. 
f) Children data 
When services are specifically addressed to children, the information provided and the tools 
to control the protection of personal data must be adapted to the target group's expected 
capabilities. Privacy notices that are written for lawyers and complex privacy setting 
mechanisms that require deep understanding of the functioning of IT and online services 
cannot be considered appropriate. Appropriate information and mechanisms would greatly 
improve the possibility for children to exercise their data protection rights more effectively. 
The additional burden for data controllers would be limited if from the very beginning, 
products and services are designed to include children-friendly privacy information and 
settings ("data protection by design"). In relation to rules on consent in the online 
environment for children below 13 years – for which parental authorisation is required – it 
should be noted that they build on existing US regulations and practices (see in particular the 
Children Online Data Protection Act of 1998) and are not expected to impose undue and 
 90
unrealistic burden upon providers of online services and other controllers. This would also not 
interfere with Member States' contract laws, which would remain unaffected. The methods 
and modalities to obtain verifiable consent would be left to Commission's implementing 
measures.  
e) Clarification of the rules applying to data processing by individuals for private purposes:  
Under this option, the current "household exemption" contained in Article 3 (2) first indent of 
the Directive would be clarified to exclude purely domestic processing addressed to a 
'definite' number of individuals. This would reduce to zero the burden of data protection 
compliance costs when relating to activities which are solely carried out in the course of 
private or family life of individuals (which is not the case with the processing of personal data 
consisting in publication publicly available on the internet so that those data are made 
accessible to an indefinite number of people). 
Article 9 of Directive 95/46/EC, however, would be reformulated in a way that it would cover 
all activities which aim at the disclosure to the public of information, opinions or ideas and 
protected by the right to freedom of expression, irrespective of the medium which is used to 
transmit them and of the person transmitting them, i.e. not linking the exceptions and 
derogations to "journalism" only. Doing so would bring private individuals engaged or 
claiming to be engaged in informing the public online via blogs, YouTube, Twitter, etc. under 
the scope of Article 9 of Directive 95/46/EC.  
Under this solution, the situation of data subjects would change compared to the current 
situation. Private individuals who disclose information, opinions or ideas to the public –  e.g. 
through blogs, YouTube or Twitter, protected by the freedom of expression – would be 
treated the same way like media professionals which process personal data “solely for 
journalistic purposes or the purpose of artistic or literary expression” and thus have to be 
exempted by Member States from certain provisions of data protection requirements if 
necessary to reconcile the right to data protection with the rules governing freedom of 
expression. In contrast to the current situation following the “Lindqvist” case149, data subjects 
would not be able to rely anymore on the full set of data protection rights and remedies 
against private individuals that process their personal data on the internet accessible by an 
indefinite number of people. However, these possible exemptions from data protection laws 
would not deprive data subjects from their right to protection of private life. Data subjects will 
continue to be able to rely on civil and criminal law remedies developed under national law to 
enforce their right to private life against private bloggers, twitterers, etc. 
8) Benefits for individuals from strengthened DPAs and more consistent enforcement 
(See above under 2.1) 
9) Strengthened remedies: 
a) role of associations 
In those cases where an individual is affected by an infringement of data protection rules, a 
considerable number of other individuals in a similar situation might be equally affected. 
Actions on behalf of individuals which might be brought by a representative entity (e.g. 
ombudsman, consumer or civil society association), should encourage beneficial remedies 
against infringement of the data protection rules, in particular by allowing savings for the 
parties involved and increasing the efficiency of both judicial and out-of-court redress with 
the supervisory authorities.150  
                                                 
149  ECJ, Case C-101/01, Bodil Lindqvist, 6.11.2003, ECR [2003] I-12971. 
150  Consumer organisations (e.g. BEUC, Consumer Focus) and non-governmental organisations (e.g. Privacy 
International) have expressed strong support for the establishment of collective redress mechanisms, both at 
 91
b) strengthened sanctions: 
Experience in Member States shows that administrative sanctions, such as fines, serve as an 
important incentive for controllers and processors for compliance. Individuals could be 
ensured that a data protection violation would not be sanctioned differently from one Member 
State to the other. At the same time, further harmonised rules on administrative sanctions 
would bring about major benefits for controllers and processors as these sanctions for 
breaches of applicable data protection law within any European jurisdiction would cease to 
vary depending on the approach taken by the applicable regulator, and thus, provide for more 
business predictability.  
10) Introduce a general obligation for data controllers to demonstrate  compliance with 
data protection law (including through evidence that data subjects' consent was 
sought and obtained wherever necessary, as well as DP Impact Assessments and 
Data Protection Officers, where applicable) 
Under this option data controllers will be obliged to demonstrate their compliance with data 
protection rules in cases of audit by date protection authorities. Annex 9 estimates the net 
administrative burden of this obligation to amount to € 600 million per annum, assuming 
100% compliance by data controllers. The need not to impose an undue burden on SMEs is 
taken duly into account when formulating these obligations, in particular in relation to DPOs 
and DPIAs, and including in the empowerment of the Commission to adopt delegated acts 
where the principle of "think small first" is integrated.  
a) Additional information obligations 
The introduction of mandatory information requirements relating to the quality of information 
provided to data subjects, as part of the enhanced transparency, will positively strengthen the 
information of data subjects about the processing of personal data relating to them. This is a 
pre-condition to give the data subject a say in the processing of personal data, ‘ex ante’, i.e. 
prior to processing and for exercising their data protection rights in general.  
For controllers, further information requirements can bring significant benefits in terms of 
accountability and the effective protection of personal data. Though the introduction of 
further mandatory information requirements for controllers entails a an additional 
administrative burden for data controllers (estimated to be approximately € 180 million per 
annum in Annex 9, assuming 100% compliance by data controllers), the cost can be justified 
in terms of enhanced accountability and compliance and should be seen in the context of the 
drastic reduction of other ex-ante controls from DPAs (e.g. simplification of notifications). 
This additional compliance cost must therefore be balanced with the eliminated costs of 
notification obligations. 
b) More responsibility for processors 
New and harmonised provisions which clarify the legal obligations for the processor, 
irrespective of the obligations laid down in the contract or the legal act with the controller, as 
well as the application of the “data protection by design” principle, the need for data 
protection impact assessments in some cases, and an obligation to cooperate with supervisory 
authorities will bring about benefits for the individual, as this will ensure that outsourcing and 
delegation by controllers to processors do not result in lowering the standard of data 
protection.  
                                                                                                                                                         
national and European levels, as an efficient tool for data subject’s empowerment and business compliance. 
The European Economic and Social Committee is equally of the opinion that consideration should be given 
for business and professional organisations and trade unions to represent individuals and bring an action 
before courts. 
 92
While these measures might entail some initial additional compliance cost for the processors, 
the cost can be justified in terms of enhanced accountability and compliance, making it easier 
in the long run for controllers to choose a processor providing sufficient guarantees for 
processing. 
c) DPOs – see detailed assessment in Annex 6  
d)DPIAs –  see detailed assessment in Annex 6  
e) Data protection by design  
Data protection by design is a measure aimed at reducing the risks of infringements of the 
data protection legislation. This would not be a requirement targeting designers and 
developers but data controllers, which should implement it when defining their data 
protection and privacy policies, especially but not solely in the field of security. It can be 
estimated to a few percentage points of the total development cost of the product or service. 
It shall also be considered that – as confirmed by a recent study conducted by the Ponemon 
Institute151 - the cost of compliance is much lower than the cost of non compliance. Recent 
incidents, such as a data breaches that occurred in major companies and where personal data 
about millions of individuals have been stolen, have shown that the cost of non compliance, 
or poor compliance are huge. Data protection by design can help reducing such risks and thus 
be beneficial both to the data controller and the individuals concerned.   
No administrative burden would be incurred by either public authorities or data controllers as 
a result of the introduction of the data protection by design principle. 
6.1.6. 2.3. Problem 3: Inconsistencies and gaps in the protection of personal data in the 
field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters 
Policy Option 2 
11) Extending the scope of data protection rules in the area of police cooperation and 
judicial cooperation in criminal matters 
Measures under this option would have positive impacts on data protection in the area of 
police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, both for individuals and law 
enforcement authorities, as they would entail: 
• The elimination of gaps, in particular by the fact of extending the scope of rules also to 
'domestic' data processing, thus ending the artificial and unpractical distinction between 
cross-border and non-cross border data processing. This would be fully in line with 
Article 16 TFEU; 
• The extension of general data protection principles to this area would have a positive 
impact on the standards of protection, and thus on individuals' data protection rights, in 
particular by strengthening the rules on right of access, transparency  and on purpose 
limitation; 
• Benefits for police and judicial authorities due to more legal certainty and consistency of 
the rules in this area, which would facilitate exchanges of personal data between 
authorities of different Member State.  
The additional specific safeguards to be put in place will be beneficial to data subjects by 
giving them additional protection in an area where the processing of personal data may be 
                                                 
151  Study is available here: 
http://www.ponemon.org/local/upload/fckjail/generalcontent/16/file/ATC_DPP%20report_FINAL.pdf  
 93
more intrusive. The increased harmonisation of the conditions for access to one's own 
personal data, or  i or the distinction to be made  between various categories of data subjects 
(criminal suspects, victims, witnesses, etc.) would strenghten data subjects' legal position vis-à-
vis police authorities. 
This would have some, but limited impact on police and criminal authorities in the Member 
States: today’s data protection principles, in particular the principle of data quality but also 
the principle of necessity and the principle of proportionality, already require a controller to 
distinguish between different categories of data subjects, as this is relevant inter alia for the 
use and storage of that data. In the police sector, the distinction between a suspect of a 
criminal activity and a non-suspect comes particular to mind as well as a data classification 
between verified and unverified information.  
Moreover, the exemptions and limitations foreseen to the rights of the data subject (of 
information, access etc) allow taking into account the specific needs of law enforcement 
authorities, in line with Declaration N° 21.   
As regards international transfers, the increased harmonised approach would provide additional 
legal certainty for both individuals and competent authorities, which is currently lacking152. 
Additional obligations upon competent authorities – such as the appointment of a DPO – have 
been tailored to the nature of the activities of such authorities and are proportionate to the 
objective pursued, i.e. to ensure a high level of data protection, without hindering police activities. 
As regards the DPO, this function can easily be performed at central level (central police 
authority) and is not meant to impose an undue burden on each police office/department.  .  
12) Addressing fragmentation 
The increased harmonisation of the rules and the extension of the scope of the Framework 
Decision, as described above, would also reduce fragmentation and increase legal certainty in 
this area for both individuals and competent authorities. A certain degree of fragmentation 
would nevertheless remain as the other "former third pillar instruments" are not specifically 
amended. This would, however, be counterbalanced by the evaluation to be carried by the 
Commission that would help identifying any possible incompatibility and propose 
amendments where necessary. 
6.1.7. 3. POLICY OPTION 3: DETAILED LEGAL RULES AT EU LEVEL 
6.1.8. 3.1. Problem 1: Barriers for business and public authorities due to fragmentation, 
legal uncertainty and inconsistent enforcement 
1) Increasing harmonisation - Detailed rules for specific sectors (e.g., employment, 
health, scientific and historical research) 
By providing for further harmonisation of rules for specific sectors (health/medical and 
employment) the internal market dimension would be further improved and the free flow of 
data would be favoured, with more legal certainty and reduced costs for data controllers, 
currently exposed to different requirements.  
However, a high level of detail and sectoral specificity would increase the risk of the rules 
becoming outdated and ineffective very quickly in view of rapid technological and economic 
development, so that frequent revisions of the instrument would be required to maintain the 
effectiveness of the provisions. An approach allowing for more flexible adaptations, e.g. by 
implementing acts, could be much more beneficial. 
2) Abolition of the notification requirements 
                                                 
152  See the Implementation report of the Framework Decision (COM…)…  
 94
The abolition of the general notification obligations for data controllers would entail a 
significant reduction of the current administrative burden for data controllers - particularly 
those operating cross-border and hence incurring the cost of notifications in more than one 
Member State - and would simplify the regulatory environment, without having a negative 
impact in terms of the protection of data subjects, given its limited added value in that respect. 
Annex 9 estimates the cost to data controllers to be EUR 200 per notification. It is estimated 
that there are approximately 650,000 notifications in the EU per year, therefore resulting in an 
approximate cost of € 130 million per annum, incurred by data controllers. The abolition of 
notifications would therefore eliminate these costs, as well as the costs linked to notification 
fees (not included in the calculation of the administrative burden). 
There is an almost unanimous support from stakeholders – particularly economic operators - 
for radically simplifying the current system and, in some cases, for abolishing notifications 
altogether. 
This change would have, however, a negative impact on those DPAs that are funded by the 
fees to be paid when notifying a data processing153.  
3) Development of an EU-wide certification/standardisation scheme (privacy seal) 
Such a measure could be beneficial for both controllers, in the EU and in 3rd countries, as it 
could make their compliance more 'visible', and for individuals, who would be reassured that 
their data are effectively protected. 
However, the cost of certifying products by third parties is high. For instance, in the existing 
voluntary certification program Europrise, the cost of certifying a single product or service 
varies from 10 man days of work of a data protection expert, for a very simple product to up 
to 100 man days of work for complex products or services. Therefore, making a 
standardisation scheme mandatory of all processing would have a significant cost, superior to 
the existing compliance costs.  
4) Setting up of a central EU Data Protection Authority (via a new EU agency) 
responsible for the supervision of all data processing with an internal market 
dimension or with an effect on the European area of freedom, security and justice 
Enforcement would be considerably improved thanks to the setting up of a pan-European 
Authority /regulatory Agency competent to issue binding decisions on Member States. This 
option would, however, entail significant costs for the EU budget.  
Examining other institutional bodies with a similar mandate and objective in order to identify 
comparison benchmarks, reveals that an EU regulatory Agency would require a substantial 
budget allocation, within the range of EUR 7-15 million. In the current economic climate, 
such an economic burden is not likely to be welcome by Member States or the European 
Parliament. 
Indicatively: 
• The overall 2011 budget for the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) 
amounts to EUR 7,6 million 
• For the EU Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) the 2008 budget amounted to EUR 
15 million (and is expected to reach up to EUR 22 million by 2013) and   
                                                 
153  This concerns, in particular, the UK DPA (ICO), for which notifications represent currently by large the main source of 
funding. They consider that a fee-based funding model for DPA is the most suitable to ensure the actual independence of 
the DPA from the Government.  
 95
• For the European Network and Information Security Agency, EUR 8,1 million for 
2011.  
In addition, this could be against EU law as an Agency cannot exercise genuine discretionary 
powers.  
5) Establishing minimum rules with regard to the definition of criminal offences 
and sanctions in the area of personal data protection 
EU minimum rules with regard to the definition of criminal offences and sanctions in the area 
of personal data protection, to be implemented by Member States, would foster the 
confidence of individuals as regards the processing of their personal data through a more 
efficient fight against crimes involving personal data. Such rules would also lessen the 
incentive and possibility for criminal controllers or processors to choose the Member State 
with the most lenient legal system as a certain approximation of the national laws prevents the 
existence of such "safer havens". Additionally, common rules strengthen mutual trust between 
the supervisory authorities, and judiciaries of the Member States. This facilitates cooperation 
and mutual recognition of judicial measures. On the other side, criminal investigations and 
sanctions may have a significant impact on individuals' rights and have a 'stigmatising' effect.  
However, this would be a very far-reaching measure – to be based on a specific legal basis 
(Article 83 TFEU) – that would encounter strong resistance from Member States. 
6.1.9. 3.2. Problem 2: Difficulties for individuals to stay in control of their personal data   
6) Extension of categories of sensitive data to: children, biometric and financial data 
The extension of special categories of “sensitive data” to those relating to biometric 
identifiers and of financial data, coupled with detailed rules on when processing would be 
lawful, would vigorously improve the level of protection for those data and this option would 
have a very high positive impact. In relation to the rights of the child, this option would 
increase the protection of children.  
Inclusion of financial data would be more controversial given its impact on the financial 
sector, whose processing would have to be generally adapted to the new data protection 
requirements. 
7) Introduction of specific provisions on online identifiers and geo-location data 
Under this PO specific Articles would regulate a specific regime for online identifiers and 
geo-location data. While this could have the advantage of allowing for more flexibility, it 
would affect the technological neutrality of the Directive, which would risk of becoming 
rapidly obsolete. 
8) Making (explicit) consent as the primary legal ground for processing 
This measure would sensibly change the current model in the Directive, based on six different 
grounds for processing and where consent does not have a primary role but is just one of 
them. This could be justified given that Article 8 of the Charter explicitly mentions only 
"consent" (and not other legal grounds). 
However, this would create a very rigid system which would be both very costly for data 
controllers to use – as they would be obliged to base their processing more often on consent, 
and be able to prove it - and not necessarily in the interest of individuals. An 'abuse' of 
consent as a legal ground for processing can, on the contrary, rather lead to a much poorer 
quality of it.   
9) Specific thresholds and criteria for notifying data breaches to data subjects 
 96
This measure would provide more legal certainty for data controllers. However, it would risk 
being rejected by stakeholders if not based on sound evidence and analysis of the 
implementation of existing legislation. Reports and studies are being prepared on the 
implementation of the e-Privacy Directive, which could be used to define specific obligations 
consistently across al sectors.   
10) Collective redress  
Where breaches of EU law (and in particular, data protection law) harm a large group of 
individuals and businesses, individual legal actions are often not an effective means to stop 
unlawful practices or to obtain compensation for the harm caused by these practices: 
individuals and businesses are often reluctant to initiate private lawsuits against unlawful 
practices, in particular if the individual loss is small in comparison to the costs of litigation. 
As a result, continued illegal practices cause significant aggregate loss to individuals and 
businesses. In addition, as acknowledged by the Digital Agenda for Europe, enforcement of 
EU Law in the Digital Environment appears sometimes to be difficult because of the lack of 
clarity on the applicable rights especially for consumers. Uncertainty and perceived difficulty 
to access redress is one important factor undermining confidence and thus constitutes an 
obstacle to the development of cross-border electronic commerce. Moreover, where breaches 
of EU law do trigger multiple individual lawsuits, the procedural laws of many Member 
States often leave the courts ill-equipped to deal with the case load efficiently and within 
reasonable delay. This can be true for injunctive collective redress, but in particular for claims 
to obtain compensation. For these reasons, mechanisms of collective redress are being 
considered in order to remedy the current shortcomings in the enforcement of EU law154. 
Not only are collective actions important for ensuring full compensation or other remedial 
action; they also perform indirectly a deterrence enhancing function. The risk of incurring 
expensive collective damages in such actions would multiply the controllers’ incentives to 
effectively ensure compliance. In this regard, an enhanced private enforcement by means of 
collective redress mechanisms would complement public enforcement.155 
Nonetheless, given that the Commission has conducted a wide public consultation on the 
issue of collective redress156 in order to explore policy options for a coherent European 
approach and consider possible further action, it would not be prudent to pre-emptively 
introduce provisions relating to collective redress in the data protection reform package. 
6.1.10. 3.3. Problem 3: Inconsistencies and gaps in the protection of personal data in the 
field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters 
11) More prescriptive and stringent rules 
The fact of providing for very prescriptive rules (i.e. imposing direct access) would not take 
into account the need to leave some flexibility to Member States in an area which remains 
                                                 
154 From Commission Staff Working Document "Towards a Coherent European Approach to Collective 
Redress" (SEC(2011)173 final), available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/news/consulting_public/0054/sec_2011_173_en.pdf  
155  This innovation is also supported by the Data Protection Authorities in the WP document on the Future of 
Privacy (op cit). And the EDPS in his opinion on the Commission’s Communication COM (2010) 609 final 
, OJ C 181, 22.6.2011, p.1 
156  http://ec.europa.eu/justice/news/consulting_public/news_consulting_0054_en.htm 
 97
sensitive. Including biometrics amongst the sensitive data would also be disproportionate 
given the needs of law enforcement authorities to use fingerprints etc in their routine work. 
Equally, carrying out a DPIA – even if only for processing of data into large scale systems, 
when the processing is likely to be risky - would impose a disproportionate obligation upon 
police and other law enforcement authorities – who already act under the legality principle – 
and  could hinder the performance of their tasks.     
12) Maximum coherence and consistency of the rules in the former third pillar  
In addition to measures foreseen in Policy Option 2 - which are highly beneficial to 
individuals and enhance data protection in this area – under this policy option consistency and 
coherence of the rules would be maximised by amending other ex-third pillar instruments, to 
the extent that they would be incompatible with the new rules.  
This would, however, have an important impact on existing forms of (police and judicial 
cooperation) as regulated in the specific instruments that would be affected and should not be 
attempted without serious evaluation. 
 
 98
 
ANNEX 6 
 
DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS OF THE INTRODUCTION OF 
DATA PROTECTION OFFICERS (DPOS)  
AND DATA PROTECTION IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (DPIAS) 
 
7.  
Introduction  
A central objective of the data protection reform package is to increase the effectiveness of 
data protection rights, by enhancing the responsibility and accountability of data controllers. 
Two particular measures included in the preferred policy option which aim to achieve this 
objective are the introduction of Data Protection Officers (DPOs) and Data Protection Impact 
Assessments (DPIAs).  
This Annex provides a detailed analysis of the expected impacts of new provisions on DPOs 
and DPIAs. In general terms, the two proposed changes are expected to have some economic 
impacts on data controllers, particularly in terms of compliance costs. For this reason, in the 
course of the public consultation some stakeholders were opposed to the introduction of such 
obligations. However, while it may be easy to overestimate the potentially negative cost-
related impacts of these measures, the benefits they can portend if a targeted, threshold-based 
approach is adopted, should not be overlooked. 
 
Data Protection Officers 
o Background 
The designation of data protection officers is an issue on which several stakeholders have 
provided input in the context of the public consultation, some highlighting potentially 
negative impacts in terms of compliance costs. 
Some of the stakeholder responses raised questions as to which type or size of organisation 
would have to designate a data protection officer. Germany already mandates a DPO for 
organisations with more than 10 employees. Existing studies point to the fact that larger 
corporations, especially multinationals, usually already have data protection officers. The 
same is true for many public data controllers in a number of Member States. The evidence 
from the German example is that introduction of DPOs has been successful, due to the 
development of best practices in specific sectors and the streamlining of administrative costs 
due to exemptions from centralised notification requirements.  
Some stakeholders argued that the requirement to designate DPOs should not be extended to 
SMEs because of the costs that would be incurred. Others argued that if DPOs were 
mandated, then concessions should be made, specifically to exempt data controllers from 
some reporting obligations.  
Furthermore, it can be expected that some organisations, perhaps a majority, will use existing 
staff to perform the function of a DPO; they will not recruit additional staff, rather they will 
assign an additional responsibility to an existing staff member, especially where they believe 
that the DPO function will not require a full-time, dedicated staff member. Yet other 
 99
organisations may not seek to designate a DPO to their respective organisations; instead, they 
will seek to draw on independent DPOs who provide services various clients. External 
contracting of work related to the responsibilities of a DPO, while still incurring some costs, 
might reduce labour and compliance burdens overall.  
o Envisaged measures in Policy Option 2 
Policy Option 2 envisages the introduction of the mandatory appointment of Data Protection 
Officers (DPOs) for public authorities, for companies above 250 employees and those whose 
core business involves risky processing. Conditions would be set to ensure the independence 
of the DPO from the data controller as regards the performance of his/her duties and tasks.  
It will also be clarified that where the controller or processor is a public authority or body the 
DPO can be appointed for several of its entities, taking account of the organisational structure 
of the public authority or body. Even in cases where a DPO is not required, a register on data 
processing activities should be kept by the data controller. 
It is a reasonable assumption that, as with other professionally provided services, such as 
accounting, general legal advice etc., a rate of € 250 per hour will be an EU average in terms 
of employing external contractors to perform DPO-related compliance activities. 
As such it is envisaged that most data controllers – other than larger organisations better 
equipped or already having a substantive expenditure on DPOs or employees performing such 
duties as part of the normal terms of their employment – will make use of a mixture of means 
to ensure compliance with compulsory aspects of the proposed changes to the data protection 
regulatory framework in the EU. 
These elements could be: 
1. Use of existing staff, with training, to perform duties and responsibilities envisaged for 
DPOs. 
2. Use of external contractors to perform these duties and responsibilities. 
3. Hiring new staff to perform these duties and responsibilities. 
The same considerations would apply for the public sector, especially considering that Policy 
Option 2 allows the flexibility of appointing one DPO for several entities within the same 
organisational structure. 
The benefits of having either a DPO or some element which will perform the duties and 
responsibilities for the DPO in a data controller can be assumed to be the following: 
1. Protecting the rights of data subjects and being a conduit between the data controller 
and data subjects 
2. Reducing compliance and administrative costs 
3. Reducing losses associated with data breaches 
According to Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC, enterprises are distinguished by 
size according to the following specific criteria: 
Category Employees Turnover- or Balance Sheet Total 
Medium sized <250 < €50 million < €43 million 
Small <50 < €10 million < €10 million 
Micro <10 < €2 million < €2 million 
 100
 
Eurostat figures indicate that the majority of EU enterprises are small and micro sized 
enterprises.157 
 Total SMEs Micros Small Medium Large 
Number, 
millions 
19.65 19.60 18.04 1.35 .21 .04 
% of total 100.0 99.8 91.8 6.9 1.1 0.2 
 
 
o Sub-options as regards the designation of Data Protection Officers 
•  
• For public data controllers: a general obligation to 
designate a DPO, without exceptions, but with flexibility 
allowing the appointment of the same DPO for several 
entities under the same organisational structure.  
• For private sector data controllers, three sub-options are 
considered: 
a. SUB-OPTION 1: DPOs should be designated when processing is carried out by large 
enterprises (more than 250 employees) and when processing is likely to present 
specific risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects; OR 
b. SUB-OPTION 2: DPOs should be designated when the processing is likely to present 
specific risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects); OR 
c. SUB-OPTION 3: DPOs should be optional, while providing incentives to data 
controllers that do designate a DPO in terms of the supervision they undergo by 
national authorities. 
•  
o Expected impacts 
The compulsory requirement to designate a DPO for public authorities would entail a cost for 
Member States’ public authorities. It is difficult to estimate such costs given that many 
public authorities already have DPOs (this varies between Member States) and that 
organisational structure and data processing varies between public authorities. Moreover, it 
would be reasonable to expect that the role of DPO would be assume by existing civil 
servants in public authorities, who will be suitably trained to perform the function, and that no 
additional staff would need to be recruited. Additionally, the fact that it is possible to appoint 
a DPO for several entities of a public administration will limit the burden even further. 
Therefore it can be expected that the financial cost of introducing this obligation would not be 
disproportionate to the risks involved in the processing of personal data by public authorities. 
As regards the private sector, the impacts of each sub-option are expected to be the following: 
                                                 
157 Eurostat 2008 figures, available at http:\epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-SF-08-
031/EN/KS-SF-08-031-EN.pdf 
 101
For Sub-Option 1: 
• The exclusion of economic operators with less than 250 employees (i.e. excluding all 
SMEs and micro enterprises) is intended to facilitate the business environment for 
comparatively smaller operators by reducing the burden of data protection compliance 
costs.  
• Exempting micro, small and medium sized enterprises from the provisions would 
exclude 99.8% of EU enterprises.  
• In some specific instances enterprises of this size might however be reasonably 
assumed to fall under the provisions of this requirement, where the processing might 
present specific risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects. These might include, 
for instance: 
1. High-tech start-up enterprises working in particular fields, e.g. health. 
2. Enterprises whose processing of personal data involves an evaluation of personal 
aspects relating to the data subject, including his or her ability, efficiency and 
conduct;   
3. Enterprises processing children's, genetic, biometric, financial or location data 
4. Enterprises processing data obtained from video surveillance 
 
In Sub-Options 2 and 3 it can be assumed that in most cases the larger enterprises’ DPO 
would have a role in ensuring compliance with sub-contractors. Assuming that 100% of large 
enterprises will be data controllers, this would entail 40,000 large size enterprises having to 
designate a DPO. It is reasonable to assume that the vast majority of large organisations 
processing personal data already have employees with the responsibilities to perform the 
duties of DPOs. From stakeholder feedback during the impact assessment study the total 
labour cost associated with recruiting an additional employee as a full-time DPO was 
estimated at €80,000 per annum.  
 
Number of large enterprises involved 40,000 
% Rate of DPO designation 100% 
DPO required 40,000 
Total Labour Cost €3.2 billion 
(per annum) 
 
This table assumes that all large enterprises will have to designate a DPO. This would entail a 
total annual cost of €3.2 billion. However, this probably significantly overstates the outcome 
since many enterprises of this size already comply with current data protection regulations. 
That being the case, it would be reasonable to assume that a majority already have DPOs or 
related staff performing similar duties. 
 
Number of large enterprises involved 40,000 
% Rate of DPO designation 10% 
DPO required 4,000 
Total labour cost €320 million 
(per annum) 
 
This table assumes that 90 per cent of large enterprises already have staff performing 
comparable duties. For 10 per cent of enterprises requiring DPOs, the total labour cost would 
be €320 million (per annum). However, it would be reasonable to assume that, given the size 
 102
of these enterprises, some of this cost would be reduced by re-training and re-skilling existing 
employees. It is impossible, however, to determine this with any degree of certainty. 
 
Similar considerations apply in the case of enterprises processing personal data falling under 
categories 1-6 above, as it would be impossible to determine the number of enterprises that 
process those types of data reliable certainty. Some estimates based on simplifying 
assumptions are however made below. 
 
In the following tables, it is assumed that 
• SMEs and micro-sized enterprises will either train and certify existing staff in 
performing routine data protection tasks, or recruit external contractors for that 
purpose; 
• Only 50% of SMEs and micro enterprises will be data controllers; 
• External contractors charge similar rates to legal validation rates, which have been 
determined from stakeholder feedback to be €250 per hour; 
• Checking compliance in processing operations which are likely to present specific 
risks will take four hours on average for all enterprises. 
 
Number of 
enterprises by size 
Micro:  
9,020,000 
Small: 
675,000 
Medium: 
105,000 
Totals 
% of data controllers 0.001 0.001 0.001  
Number of data 
controllers 
9,020 675 105 9800 
Risky processing 
operations, annual 
number of times 
1 1 1 3 
External contractor 
hours required 
4 4 4 12 
Total charges €1,000 €1000 €1000 €3,000 
Total costs for data 
controllers 
€9,020,000 €675,000 €105,000 €9,800,000 
 
This table illustrates that if 0.001% of small and medium-sized enterprises who are data 
controllers require validation in terms of processing risky data, the total cost for each data 
controller would be €1,000 with a total cost across the EU of €9,800,000 (per annum). 
 
In examining these figures, it is arguable that the costs are broadly in line with other external 
costs facing small and micro-sized enterprises such as accountancy or IT related fees. 
 
Data Protection Impact Assessments 
o Background 
The obligation for data controllers to carry out a DPIA when processing operations are likely 
to present specific risks  to the rights and freedoms of data subjects will entail some additional 
compliance costs (in terms of conducting the DPIA) and administrative burden (in terms of 
providing the information to public authorities about the DPIA).  
DPIAs, however, have the potential to simplify data protection processes for data controllers 
in the medium- to long-term by ensuring effective compliance with data protection rules. 
Recent experience in DPIAs in several Member States and internationally has shown that this 
 103
procedure has beneficial effects in terms of rationalising and streamlining processing 
operations, and closes potential gaps in compliance and security.  
A DPIA can help in identifying and managing data protection risks, avoiding unnecessary 
costs (in terms of problems being discovered at a later stage), avoiding inadequate data-
processing solutions, improving the security of personal data and most importantly for an 
economic operator, avoiding the loss of trust and reputation.  
While labour costs for some categories of data controllers might not increase due to 
employees with relevant skills and responsibilities already being in place, with regard to 
DPIAs, it can be assumed that a broader range of stakeholders will incur resource costs. 
While in some Member States, such as the UK, the use of Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) 
in government departments and agencies is growing, most Member States and the vast 
majority of data controllers have yet to use PIAs or DPIAs. Estimating potential costs for 
DPIAs is dependent on a number of contextual factors.  
In theory, if a new project, technology, service, product or any scheme involves the collection 
and/or processing of personal data, a DPIA (or, better still, a PIA) would ideally be carried 
out. The scale and rigour of the DPIA will depend on how an organisation perceives the risks 
and the seriousness with which it tackles those risks. If the risks are regarded as minimal or 
negligible, then a small-scale DPIA may be conducted. If the organisation perceives 
significant risks, then it would be advisable to opt for a full-scale DPIA, one that engages 
stakeholders, with the aim of identifying all possible risks, assessing those risks and devising 
strategies to avoid or mitigate those risks.   
The reporting costs of a DPIA would be the least costly part of a DPIA – the real costs will be 
in determining whether a DPIA should be conducted, gathering information about the project, 
deciding whether to engage stakeholders (internal and/or external to the organisation), 
identifying the risks, assessing the risks, identifying options for avoiding or mitigating the 
risks and only then preparing a DPIA report, making recommendations, following up on those 
recommendations to ensure they are actually implemented. There may be additional costs if 
an external assessor is brought in to conduct the DPIA. Engaging stakeholders could take 
several forms – e.g. an online consultation, briefing meetings, working groups, face-to-face 
interviews, etc. Even if a DPIA is conducted without resorting to external stakeholders, 
usually there will be several internal stakeholders involved, e.g. legal staff, project staff, 
operational staff, procurement staff, perhaps HR staff, the public relations department, risk 
managers, internal audit staff, etc. The amount of time consumed by a DPIA (or PIA) would 
depend on how serious the privacy (or data protection) risks are estimated to be, but it could 
escalate considerably.  
 
o Benefits of conducting a DPIA 
Several benefits can be identified for conducting a DPIA158:  
• A company (or government department) that undertakes a PIA with good intent, with a 
genuine interest in engaging stakeholders, including the public, has an opportunity to 
earn trust and good will from individuals-consumers. Businesses able to sustain a high 
                                                 
158 The benefits listed here have been extracted from Wright, David, and Paul de Hert, “Introduction to privacy 
impact assessment”, Chapter 1, in David Wright and Paul de Hert (eds.), Privacy Impact Assessment, 
Springer, Dordrecht, 2011 [forthcoming]. The book discusses PIA, rather than a more narrowly scoped 
DPIA, but the benefits of a DPIA will be broadly the same.  
 104
level of trust and confidence can differentiate themselves from their rivals and thereby 
gain a competitive advantage. 
• If the project does raise difficult issues with regard to data protection, ideas from 
stakeholders may be particularly welcome. Even if stakeholders do not manage to 
generate some new considerations, the organisation at least has an opportunity of gaining 
stakeholders’ understanding and respect.  
• Transparency in the process may also be a way of avoiding liabilities downstream. If the 
organisation is able to demonstrate that it did engage and consult with a wide range of 
stakeholders, was forthcoming with information, considered different points of view, it 
will be more difficult for some stakeholders to claim subsequently that the organisation 
was negligent in its undertaking. By being open and transparent from the outset, the 
organisation can minimise the risk of negative media attention.  
• The New Zealand PIA Handbook describes a privacy impact assessment as an “early 
warning system”.  The PIA 'radar screen' can enable an organisation to spot a privacy 
problem and take effective counter-measures before that problem strikes the business as a 
privacy crisis. It goes on to say that the PIA process can help the organisation by 
providing credible information upon which business decisions can be based and by 
enabling organisations to identify and deal with their own problems internally and 
proactively rather than awaiting customer complaints, external intervention or a bad 
press. 
• PIA is a form of risk assessment, an integral part of risk management. It encourages cost-
effective solutions, since it is more cost-effective and efficient to build “privacy by 
design” into projects, policies, technologies and other such initiatives at the design phase 
than attempt a more costly retrofit after a technology is deployed or a policy 
promulgated. A PIA creates an opportunity for organisations to anticipate and address the 
likely impacts of new initiatives, to foresee problems and identify what needs to be done 
to design in features that minimise any impact on privacy and/or to find less privacy-
intrusive alternatives. 
• A PIA should also be regarded as a learning experience, for both the organisation that 
undertakes the PIA as well as the stakeholders who are engaged in the process. An open 
PIA process helps the public understand what information the organisation is collecting, 
why the information is being collected, how the information will be used and shared, 
how the information may be accessed, and how it will be securely stored. The PIA’s 
educational role is a way of demonstrating that the organisation has critically analysed 
how the project will deal with personal data. It might be the case that certain identified 
risks on privacy cannot be mitigated and/or have to be accepted (residual risks); even so, 
the PIA report, as the result of a clear and systematic process, is something to which 
interested parties can refer and be informed of the reasons why some assumptions were 
made and decisions taken. Thus, a PIA promotes a more fully informed decision-making 
process. 
 
o Expected economic impacts and case studies 
As a one-off cost which might be significant, some organisations, especially smaller ones, 
might view the obligation to conduct a DPIA with concern. However, privacy impact 
assessments are a growing component of some organisations’ strategic thinking and risk 
planning in relation to the development of new products and services. Even without a 
 105
provision about DPIA in the new data protection framework, this trend will continue. The 
recently approved RFID PIA Framework provides evidence of this. 
The first example below illustrates the indicative estimated costs of a small-scale DPIA: 
 
 
 
DPIA components Costs in euros Totals in euros 
Labour €450 x 20 days €9,000 
IT €1,000 €1,000 
Stakeholder engagement €1,500 €1,500 
Auditing €2,500 €2,500 
Total  €14,000 
 
The example above focuses on a small number of impacted data subjects utilising a new 
product offering in one Member State, involving the automatic processing of personal data. 
The assumptions made in this example are as follows: 
1. The DPIA takes 20 days to complete at a rate of €450 per day.159 
2. The data controller conducts a limited exercise with stakeholders – in this example, 
one focus group (€1,000) and an online consultation exercise (€500). 
3. There are IT-related costs of €1,000 to analyse the feedback and data generated during 
the course of the DPIA. This also includes any costs associated with disseminating the 
results of the DPIA.  
4. 10 hours of legal validation are needed to audit the results of the DPIA prior to any 
reporting obligations or notifications. 
The second example below focuses on a medium-scale DPIA: 
                                                 
159 This labour rate is the EU figure for external consultations. Conducting a DPIA is assumed to be a 
comparable exercise in terms of labour expertise, like other consultation and research exercises. One can 
expect some divergences in costs in Member States. 
Example 1: Small scale DPIA DataStore: Commercial and innovative uses of 
sensitive data 
 
As part of the development of its marketing operations, DataStore has purchased 
behavioural advertising software program from a non-EU vendor. The system integrates 
with DataStore’s consumer databases and those of other online service providers to target 
DataStore advertising at individuals who visit the DataStore website. Customers will be 
sent an initial sign-up e-mail explaining the data processing procedures and asking for 
consent.  
 
After consulting with relevant regulatory authorities, DataStore recognises that it needs to 
conduct a DPIA. The DPIA includes a reporting obligation to consumers and to the 
relevant regulatory authority. 
 106
 
 
 
DPIA components Costs in euros Totals in euros 
Labour €450 x 40 days 18,000 
IT €1,500 1,500 
Stakeholder engagement €10,000 10,000 
Auditing €2,500 5,000 
Total  €34,500 
 
The assumptions made in this example are as follows: 
1. The DPIA takes 40 days to complete at a rate of €450 per day.160 
2. The data controller engages stakeholders via a series of eight focus groups (€8,000) 
and an extended online consultation exercise (€2,000). 
3. There are IT-related costs of €1,500 to analyse feedback and data generated during the 
course of the DPIA. This also includes any costs associated with disseminating the 
results of the DPIA.  
4. 10 hours of legal validation are needed to audit the results of the DPIA prior to any 
reporting obligations or notification. 
The third example below illustrates a large-scale DPIA. 
 
 
                                                 
160 As stated above, this labour rate is the EU figure for external consultations.  
Example 3: Security and biometrics 
 
In compliance with national legislation, a law enforcement data controller has 
implemented a biometric recognition system utilising airport-based CCTV systems which 
identify wanted suspects and suspicious behaviour in public spaces.  
 
After consulting with the relevant national data protection authority, the data controller 
agreed that a DPIA should be carried out. In reporting the results of the DPIA, the DPO 
agreed to make the results public via governmental websites. 
Example 2: LocNav: Location based data and services 
 
LocNav is a small regional operator offering satellite navigation services in a number of 
member states. It plans to implement product and service offerings with local businesses 
as part of its SatNav feature set. The service will advertise particular retail and other 
amenities for users of the system if asked to do so in planning a trip by data subjects. 
 
It decides to carry out a DPIA to assess any potential risks to privacy and to assess the best 
way of maintaining compliance with data protection regulations. 
 107
 
DPIA components Costs in euros Totals in euros 
Labour €450 x 60 days x 5 Experts €135,000 
IT €1,500 €1,500 
Stakeholder engagement €10,000 €10,000 
Auditing €2,500 €2,500 
Total  €149,000161 
 
The assumptions made in this example are as follows: 
1. The DPIA takes 60 days to complete and involves five experts at a rate of €450.162 
2. The data controller engages stakeholders via eight focus groups (at a cost of €8,000) 
and an extended online consultation (€2,000). 
3. There are IT-related costs of €1,500 to analyse feedback and data generated during the 
course of the DPIA. This also includes any costs associated with disseminating the 
results of the DPIA. 
4. 10 hours of legal validation are needed to audit the results of the DPIA prior to any 
reporting obligations or notifications. 
 
Estimating the administrative costs associated with DPIAs is a difficult task as the nature of 
DPIAs in and of themselves will be very context-specific to the size of enterprise needing to 
undertake one and the specific nature of the project or technology or service or other scheme 
for which the DPIA is to be conducted. Likewise, the main bulk of costs associated with a 
DPIA will arguably not be linked with the reporting obligations of proposed changes; rather 
the main body of costs will be in the consultation and identifying, assessing and mitigating 
risks as well as the actual work of conducting the DPIA itself.  
 
                                                 
161 This figure also corresponds to stakeholder feedback for a large multi-national as to expected costs in 
conducting a privacy impact assessment. 
162 This labour rate is the EU figure for external consultations.  
 108
 
ANNEX 7 
 
 ANALYSIS OF THE IMPACTS OF POLICY OPTIONS ON FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 
 
1. POLICY OPTION 1:  SOFT ACTION 
This option would have positive impacts for the protection of personal data and privacy by 
clarifying and promoting the conditions for exercising the existing data subject's rights:  
- interpretative communications and explicit references to the transparency and data 
minimisation principles would increase legal certainty also in relation to data subjects' 
rights ;   
- non-legislative measures would enhance the effectiveness of individuals' rights, in 
particular by awareness-raising and promoting Privacy Enhancing Technologies and 
voluntary privacy certification schemes, which would support the application of data 
protection principles. 
However this positive impact will remain limited, as it aims to make the application of the 
existing data subjects' rights more effective, but without adding substantial changes as regards 
these rights and their enforcement. 
This option will also have a positive impact in relation to the rights of the child as clearer 
information policy and promotion of awareness-raising will contribute to the protection of 
children.   
2. POLICY OPTION 2: MODERNISED LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
This option has a very positive impact on the protection of personal data in all its 
dimensions. In particular the clarification of the role and conditions of consent will enhance 
the data subjects' control over their data. Data subjects' rights would be significantly 
strengthened by a detailed set of rules on the data subject rights, which comprises in particular 
additional information obligations for controllers towards the data subject, as a general 
precondition for exercising the rights in relation to data protection. Specific rights such as the 
right for deletion will be strengthened and clarified ("right to be forgotten"). Rules on the 
modalities will facilitate the data subject's exercising their rights. The specific safeguards on 
the protection of 'sensitive' personal data will be extended to genetic data.  
A range of further new and clarified elements would reinforce the effectiveness of the right to 
protection of personal data: reducing the fragmentation and increasing legal certainty by more 
detailed rules in the legal instrument and implementing acts and strengthened cooperation 
between Data Protection Authorities would considerably help to ensure the same level of data 
protection and the consistent implementation of the right to data protection in all MS and 
towards non EU-controllers and the effectiveness of enforcement.  
The right to respect for private life would be equally strengthened by the measures to enhance 
the protection of individuals' personal data, but also, in addition, as regards the clarification of 
the exemption of purely private activities from the application of the data protection rules. 
The clarification of the rules on 'sensitive' data and its extension to genetic data would also 
enhance non-discrimination.   
 109
The clarification of the application of rules for children will have a further positive impact on 
the rights of the child. 
The relation of data protection rules to the freedom of expression and information will be 
clarified for the media, but also for private persons, who (e.g. as bloggers) make personal data 
of other accessible for an indefinite number of individuals.   
As regards the freedom to conduct a business there would be, on the one hand, positive 
impacts by reducing fragmentation, enhancing legal certainty and simplification (such as by 
reducing the notification requirement). - On the other hand; this option contains also elements 
which could impact the freedom to conduct a business negatively. New specific requirements 
and uniform rules (e.g. introduction of Data Protection Impact Assessments, reinforced data 
subject rights, particularly when using Internet) could limit to a certain extent freedom to 
conduct business. However, such limitation does not seem disproportionate, taking account 
the positive impacts. This is in particular the case for the appointment of Data Protection 
Officers, which will be entrusted with tasks which would otherwise be carried out by other 
means, in order to comply with the data protection rules.  
The protection of intellectual property rights is not impacted by reinforced protection of data 
subject rights.  
This option would have also a positive impact on health care, as more uniform rules will be 
established for the exceptions to the processing of sensitive data, in particular those 
concerning health data.   
The right to an effective remedy will be reinforced by providing access to the courts not only 
to the individual or controller or processor concerned, but also by providing the right for 
associations to bring an action before the court on behalf of individuals. Also the right of 
DPAs to engage in legal proceedings would be clarified.  
3. POLICY OPTION 3: DETAILED LEGAL RULES AT EU LEVEL 
As regards the protection of personal data and privacy this option would have a very high 
positive impact. On top of the very positive impact of the measures provided by Policy Option 
2, the data subjects' rights and legal certainty would be further strengthened by detailed 
harmonisation in all policy fields.  
On freedom to conduct a business, this option would have a similar impact as Policy Option 
2. 
In relation to health care, there would be an increased positive impact as there would be more 
detailed harmonised rules on data protection in the health and medical sector. 
As regards freedom of expression and the protection of Intellectual property rights there 
would be no additional measures, meaning that the impact would be the same impact as in 
Policy Option 2. There would be a higher positive impact on the right to an effective remedy 
and to a fair trial thanks to the introduction of collective actions in this area. 
 
 110
 
ANNEX 8 
 
CONSULTATION OF SMES 
 
INTRODUCTION  
SME panel consultations are regularly conducted through the Enterprise Europe Network, 
which is managed by DG Enterprise and Industry. SMEs in EU Member States are contacted 
by the regional associations that constitute the Enterprise Europe Network. Participation in 
the consultations is voluntary. 
In the context of this impact assessment, the SME panel was utilised in order to consult SMEs 
on the data protection obligations in the baseline scenario. 383 responses were submitted to 
the consultation. 
SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS   
The main findings of the SME consultation are the following: 
2.1. Notifications to DPAs 
Nearly one third of the participants (29.2%) stated that they notify processing of personal data 
to DPAs. Another third of respondents (33.2%) stated that their data processing does not need 
to be notified. The remainder either stated that they do not process any personal data (21.7%) 
or responded "I don’t know / not applicable" (14.4%).  
Generally, SMEs responded that they do not find these notifications particularly difficult, but 
many find them bureaucratic (30%), even if they do not notify themselves. 
Regarding the financial impact of these declarations, about 30% of those providing an 
estimate of costs considered them to be higher than €500, while about 40% estimated them at 
less than €100 and 22% between €100 and €300. However, given that 21.5% of consulted 
stakeholders did not provided any estimate and most respondents either did not answer this 
question or chose "I don’t know / not applicable", these financial estimates concern only a 
very limited subset of the panel. 
2.2. Privacy Policies on SME Websites  
A high percentage of respondents (42.8%) indicated that their privacy policy does not appear 
on their website. Slightly fewer respondents (36.8%) stated that their website does include a 
privacy policy.  
2.3. Data Protection Officers 
Almost half of respondents have some type of Data Protection Officer, although only few 
(6%) stated that they employ a person to deal with data protection issues full-time, whereas 
most of these respondents (40%) stated that someone does it alongside other activities. 
A smaller share of respondents (38.1%) stated that there is no person formally assigned in 
their SME to deal with data protection issues and the remainder responded "I don’t know / not 
applicable". 
2.4. Information to data subjects and its financial impacts 
Nearly half (48.6%) of the SMEs have been providing information to data subjects, as 
required by data protection laws, but only 27.4% of responding SMEs always provide this 
 111
information. More than 21% of respondents stated that they never provide such information 
and 25% responded "I don’t know / not applicable". 
The financial impact of information to data subjects appears to be relatively low, since 16.2% 
of respondents indicated costs of less than €100 and only about 12% of the respondents 
indicated costs exceeding €100 (3.7% indicated costs exceeding €300 and another 3.7% 
indicated costs exceeding €500). The majority of respondents (70%) answered "I don’t know / 
not applicable". 
2.5. Access of data subjects to their personal data  
The majority of SMEs consulted stated that they have never received requests from data 
subjects to access their data (53.8%). Only a minority declare having received such requests 
(about 19.3% rarely and 6.5% frequently).  
Regarding the time needed for the SMEs to respond, only 19.1% are able to roughly quantify 
it, most of those (11.5% of total respondents) indicated that it requires less than 1 day of 
work.  
Only very few stakeholders (2.6%) charge a fee for this access. These fees are generally 
between €10 and €50 with only one respondent (0.3%) charging more than €100.  
54% of SMEs do not charge a fee for such requests and 32% answered "I don’t know / not 
applicable". 
2.6. SMEs and legal advice on data protection 
Most of the consulted SMEs (54.3%) have never sought paid legal advice on data protection 
issues, whereas 20.4% responded that they have.  
Only 16.5% of respondents were able to indicate the costs of obtaining these services. These 
appear to vary somewhat, with 3.7% of respondents indicating expenses of less than €200, 
4.2% indicating expenses between €201 and €500, 3.9% indicating expenses between €501 
and €700 and 4.7% indicating expenses of more than €701. 
2.7. Data breaches 
Most respondents (71.5%) have never experienced a data breach. Among the 7.1% of SMEs 
that state having experienced breaches, 1.6% related to data being lost, 2.1% stolen and 3.4% 
misused.  
Among those SMEs that experienced breaches, roughly half (i.e. 3.9% of SMEs consulted) 
informed the individuals whose data were affected by breaches, whereas the other half did 
not. Regarding the cost of the notification to affected individuals, respondents indicated that 
the notification cost: less than €500 (for 1.6% of SMEs consulted), in the range €501-1000 
(for 0.5%), in the range €1001-2000 (for 0.8%) and in the range €2001-5000 for only one 
single respondent (0.3%).  
 112
3. DETAILED RESULTS PER QUESTION   
1. In most cases, the processing of personal data needs to be declared to the National Data Protection Authority. Have 
you ever declared the processing of personal data to your national Data Protection Authority (DPA)? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents  
 No, I don't process any personal data 83 (21.7%) 
 No, my processing does not need to be 
declared 
127 (33.2%) 
 Yes, I declared processing to my DPA 112 (29.2%) 
 Don't know / Not applicable 55 (14.4%) 
 N/A 6 (1.6%) 
    
2. If you answered yes in question 1, can you estimate the cost to your company of providing this information to your 
national Data Protection Authority?   
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Less than €100 32 (8.4%) 
 €101 - €300 18 (4.7%) 
 €301 - €500    8 (2.1%) 
 More than €500 24 (6.3%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 145 (37.9%) 
 N/A 156 (40.7%) 
    
 
 
3. Which description best reflects the declaration of data processing to national data protection authorities? [You may 
select more than one answer] 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Easy 43 (11.2%) 
 Difficult 37 (9.7%) 
 Bureaucratic 115 (30%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 141 (36.8%) 
 N/A 47 (12.3%) 
    
4. Do you process personal data of individuals residing in Member States of the European Union (EU) other than 
your own, or of countries outside of the EU / European Economic Area (EEA)? [You may select more than one answer] 
-multiple choices reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Yes, I do process personal data of individuals from 
Member States other than my own 
92 (24%) 
 Yes, I do process personal data of individuals from 
countries outside the EU/EEA (such as the US or 
countries in Asia, Africa) 
53 (13.8%) 
 No, I do not process personal data of individuals 
from outside my own Member State. 
181 (47.3%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 94 (24.5%) 
    
 
 113
5. Have you experienced difficulties when needing to transfer personal data to other Member States in the European 
Union? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Yes 19 (5%) 
 No 117 (30.5%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 202 (52.7%) 
 N/A 45 (11.7%) 
    
6. Have you experienced difficulties when needing to transfer personal data to countries outside of the European 
Union? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Yes 20 (5.2%) 
 No 93 (24.3%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 223 (58.2%) 
 N/A 47 (12.3%) 
    
7. If your company has a website, does it include a page explaining your privacy policy? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Yes 139 (36.3%) 
 No 164 (42.8%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 64 (16.7%) 
 N/A 16 (4.2%) 
    
8. Is someone in your company formally assigned to deal with data protection issues? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Yes, there is a full time position 23 (6%) 
 Yes, someone does it alongside his/her other 
activities 
155 (40.5%) 
 No 146 (38.1%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 35 (9.1%) 
 N/A 24 (6.3%) 
    
 
 
9. Data protection laws oblige data controllers to provide information to individuals on whom you hold personal data, 
known as 'data subjects', about the identity of the data controller, the purpose of the processing, whether it will be 
passed on to third parties and so forth. Have you ever provided this information to data subjects? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Always 105 (27.4%) 
 Often 37 (9.7%) 
 Sometimes 44 (11.5%) 
 Never 80 (20.9%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 96 (25.1%) 
 N/A 21 (5.5%) 
    
 114
10. If yes in question 9, can you estimate how much it costs your company to provide this information to 
individuals every time you need to provide it? (Examples of such costs may include costs of legal advice, 
design and printing costs, clerical costs, administrative overheads etc).  
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents  
 Less than €100 62 (16.2%) 
 €101 - €300 19 (5%) 
 €301 - €500 14 (3.7%) 
 More than €500 14 (3.7%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 144 (37.6%) 
 N/A 130 (33.9%) 
    
11. Individuals are generally entitled to ask for access to their personal data you hold, for example in 
order to correct it, to delete it, or simply to obtain a copy. Have you already had such requests?  
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents  
 Yes, frequently 25 (6.5%) 
 Yes, rarely 74 (19.3%) 
 No 206 (53.8%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 54 (14.1%) 
 N/A 24 (6.3%) 
    
12. If yes in question 11, how long does responding to such requests usually take?   [Average duration (in work days)] 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 More than 0,5 working day 44 (11.5%) 
 1 working day 13 (3.4%) 
 2 working days 10 (2.6%) 
 3 working days 6 (1.6%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 133 (34.7%) 
 N/A 177 (46.2%) 
    
13. Do you charge a fee for processing such requests?    -single choice reply- (optional) 
 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents) 
 Yes 10 (2.6%) 
 No 207 (54%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 122 (31.9%) 
 N/A 44 (11.5%) 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 115
14. If yes in question 13, how much is the fee?    -single choice reply- (optional) 
 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Less than €10 2 (0.5%) 
 €10 - €50 5 (1.3%) 
 €51 - €100 2 (0.5%) 
 More than €100 1 (0.3%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 138 (36%) 
 N/A 235 (61.4%) 
    
 
15. Have you ever paid for legal advice on data protection issues, for example on preparing a privacy page on your 
website or data protection clauses for a contract? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Yes 78 (20.4%) 
 No 208 (54.3%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 61 (15.9%) 
 N/A 36 (9.4%) 
 
16. If yes in question 15, how much did this legal advice cost your company? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Less than €200 14 (3.7%) 
 €201- €500 16 (4.2%) 
 €501 - €700 15 (3.9%) 
 More than €700 18 (4.7%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 123 (32.1%) 
 N/A 197 (51.4%) 
    
 
17. Have you had an incident involving personal data (e.g. personal data held by your company was lost, misplaced or 
misused during the incident)                             -single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents 
 Yes, personal data was lost 6 (1.6%) 
 Yes, personal data was stolen 8 (2.1%) 
 Yes, personal data was misused 13 (3.4%) 
 No 274 (71.5%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 48 (12.5%) 
 N/A 34 (8.9%) 
    
 116
18. If yes in question 17, were you able to inform the individuals whose information was affected when the breach 
occurred?                                                              -single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents % of Total Respondents) 
 Yes 15 (3.9%) 
 No 16 (4.2%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 126 (32.9%) 
 N/A 226 (59%) 
    
19. If yes in question 18, can you estimate the total cost to your company of informing affected individuals about that 
incident? 
-single choice reply- (optional) 
  Number of Respondents  % of Total Respondents 
 Less than €500 6 (1.6%) 
 €501 - €1000 2 (0.5%) 
 €1001- €2000 3 (0.8%) 
 €2001- €5000 1 (0.3%) 
 €5001- €10000 0 (0%) 
 More than €10000 0 (0%) 
 Don't know / not applicable 129 (33.7%) 
 N/A 242 (63.2%) 
 
 117
 
ANNEX 9 
 
CALCULATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS IN THE BASELINE SCENARIO AND 
PREFERRED OPTION 
 
 
o INTRODUCTION 
In accordance with the European Commission Impact Assessment Guidelines (in particular 
Annex 10 on administrative burden), this impact assessment closely examined the 
administrative costs imposed by existing regulation and by the preferred policy option. 
Data sources in this exercise included EUROSTAT figures, Eurobarometers, qualitative and 
quantitative data gathered through a series of public consultations with stakeholders, and desk 
research. The analysis of this annex is confined to the costs incurred by the private sector in 
order to comply with information obligations contained in the data protection rules163. Other 
compliance costs imposed by existing legislation and the preferred option are beyond the 
scope of this analysis. 
 
o METHODOLOGY  
All calculations are carried out using the Standard Cost Model (SCM). A number of 
methodological challenges were encountered in using the SCM in the context of data 
protection and adapting it to the particularities of the area. The most significant challenges 
and caveats are set out below, along with an explanation of the methodological steps 
undertaken: 
• All costs included in this calculation are considered to be administrative burdens and 
not costs that would be incurred as a result of practices undertaken by an entity even in the 
absence of the legislation. For this reason the values in the column "Business as Usual 
Costs" are always zero. 
• Directive 95/46/EC and the preferred option were thoroughly screened for information 
obligations on either enterprises or public authorities. 
• The quantitative calculations cover only the private sector; the public sector is not 
included in the calculations as no reliable statistics are available regarding the number of 
data controllers in the public sector who must comply with the Directive in the baseline 
scenario, and subsequently with the obligations in the preferred option. Framework 
Decision 2008/977/EC has also been screened for information obligations that involve 
administrative burden on public authorities, but the involved costs were judged to be 
negligible, given the wide exemptions in this area as regards, for example, the duty of 
informing data subjects  that their personal data is sent cross-border for processing by 
other public authorities. 
                                                 
163 Annex 10 of the IA Guidelines defines administrative costs "as the costs incurred by enterprises, the 
voluntary sector, public authorities and citizens in meeting legal obligations to provide information on their 
action or production, either to public authorities or to private parties."  
 118
• Whenever legal fees are considered in the calculation an estimate of €250/hour was used, 
which represents a conservative average of the varying rates across Member States. This 
was confirmed by stakeholder feedback.  
• Whenever clerical work is considered in the calculation, an estimate of the cost of a full-
time employee as €50/hour was used.  
• Regulatory origin: in the baseline scenario calculation, all information obligations have 
an EU regulatory origin, with the exception of the last row, "National Transpositions of 
Directive 95/46/EC". In the preferred option calculation, all information obligations have 
an EU regulatory origin. 
• Recurrence: all cost calculations are made on an annual basis. Wherever the value in the 
"Frequency per year" column is less than 1, the figure refers to a multiannual recurrence. 
For instance, if the figure in the "Frequency" column is 0.2 the recurrence is on a 5-yearly 
basis. 
• Concerning the total number of data controllers used in the calculation of 
administrative burden, in the absence of official statistics on the number of data 
controllers in the EU, the eventual estimate used in the SCM is based on EUROSTAT 
2008 figures on the total number of enterprises in the EU. The table below sets out the 
reasoning and steps involved in obtaining the total number of data controllers used in the 
calculation: 
Table 1: Number of enterprises and data controllers in the EU 
Indicator Ref. year Source Value 
Number of enterprises in the EU 
(non-financial business economy): 
all can potentially be considered data 
controllers (processing personal data 
such as employee data, customer 
databases, etc) 
2008 EUROSTAT 2008164 21,003,900 
Based on the data protection SME 
Panel (see Annex 9), particularly 
figures relating to the compliance of 
SMEs with the current data 
protection rules165, it can be assumed 
that approximately 42% of the total 
number of companies can be 
practically considered as data 
controllers within the meaning of the 
Directive. This is the approximate 
total number of enterprises/data 
controllers on which the 
administrative burden of the 
Directive is actually imposed. 
2010 Data Protection SME Panel 8,821,638 
 
                                                 
164 EUROSTAT 2008, Key figures on European business with a special feature on SMEs,Available at 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-ET-11-001/EN/KS-ET-11-001-EN.PDF  
165 SME Panel on data protection, Questions 7 (36% compliance) and 9 (48% compliance). 
 119
• Not all data controllers in the EU are affected by the problem of legal fragmentation. The 
data controllers affected would be those that process personal data of individuals from 
another Member State, and also have an establishment in that Member State, within the 
meaning of Article 4.1 (a) of the Directive, which allows for a "cumulative" and 
simultaneous application of different national laws to a same data controller established in 
several Member States. This means that such a controller will have to comply with the 
different national laws, obligations and varied requirements that apply for each of its 
establishments. It is important to note that the notion of "establishment", as confirmed by 
the opinion of the Article 29 Working Party on the issue, has generally been interpreted 
broadly by DPAs. In practice even a legal representative, a one-man office or a simple 
agent in a Member State are often considered as an "establishment", and thus lead to the 
application of the national laws of the Member States concerned.  
• In order to obtain the number of entities affected by legal fragmentation, in the absence 
of official statistics, the proxy of number of enterprises involved in cross-border trade 
was used. These figures were obtained from the 2008166 and 2010167 Eurobarometers on 
consumer protection, where 21% and 22% were observed respectively (hence the more 
conservative figure of 21% was used). The reason for choosing this proxy is that an 
enterprise conducting business cross-border in another Member State, provided that it is 
also established in that Member State (within the meaning of Article 4.1 of the Directive), 
will be subject to the data protection law of that Member State. This would in turn entail 
significant additional costs in terms of legal adaptation and ensuring compliance with the 
data protection laws of that Member State. 
Table 2: Methodology for data controllers affected by legal fragmentation 
Indicator Ref. year Source Value 
Number of data controllers in the EU 2010 Data Protection SME Panel 8,821,638 
No. of B2C service/retail companies 
selling to final consumers in a 
country different to their own (21%). 
2008, 2010 Flash Eurobarometers 224 and 300 21% 
Total number of data controllers 
engaged in cross-border  trade  2008, 2011 
2008 EUROSTAT figures 
on enterprises in the EU, 
Flash EB 300. 
1,852,544 
Assuming that only 50% of service /retail companies selling to final consumers 
in a Member State different to their own are also established in those Member 
States according to Article 4.1(a) of the Directive (e.g. by having a branch, a 
legal representative, a commercial agent etc in those Member States) 
926,272 
   
• The figure of 926,272 in the table above is obtained by multiplying the total number of 
data controllers in the EU (8,821,638), by the percentage of B2C companies engaged in 
cross-border trade (21%). It is assumed that the cross-border indicator of 21% applies also 
in the case of B2B cross-border trade. The resulting figure of 1,852,544 is further 
subtracted by 50% in the last row of the table to account for those data controllers which 
                                                 
166  Flash Eurobarometer 224 – Business attitudes towards cross-border sales and consumer protection, available 
at http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/strategy/docs/fl224%20_eurobar_cbs_summary.pdf (survey of managers of 
companies over 10 employees). This figure is extrapolated to companies of less than 10 employees. 
167  Flash Eurobarometer 300 - Retailers’ attitudes towards cross-border trade and consumer protection, available 
at  http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/strategy/docs/retailers_eurobarometer_2011_en.pdf  
 120
may not actually be established in other Member States, according to Article 4.1(a) of 
the Directive. 
• In the 2010 Eurobarometer 21% of retailers said they also sold to consumers in other EU 
countries. More precisely, 2% of retailers reported selling products and services in just 
one additional EU country, 6% mentioned two or three other EU countries and the largest 
proportion – 13% – was engaged in cross-border sales in at least four other EU countries. 
Table 3: Number of companies/data controllers active cross border 
Total number of data controllers 
established and processing data 
cross border 
926,272 
% data controllers processing data in 
one additional MS (2010 EB) 2% 88,217 
% data controllers processing data in 
two or three additional MS (2010 
EB) 
6% 264,649 
% data controllers processing data in 
at least four additional MS (2010 
EB) 
13% 573,407 
 
• The figures from Table 3 are used in rows 5, 6, 7 of the administrative burden calculation 
spreadsheet. 
 
3. DETAILED EXPLANATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN CALCULATION 
(a) Baseline Scenario 
(i) Cost of information obligations: Line 1 refers to the obligation on data controllers to 
provide information to data subjects according to Articles 10 and 11 of Directive 
95/46/EC. It is estimated that 4 hours of legal validation work are required. It is 
further estimated that a clerical full-time employee will need to work for two hours to 
prepare this material. The costs of reproducing the information material is assumed to 
be zero. It is assumed that this is a cost which recurs on a 5-yearly basis, in order to 
account for technological lifecycles, which would require adaptations in the 
information provided.  
(ii) Cost of providing information to data subjects about access rights: Line 2 refers to 
the obligation on data controllers to inform data subjects on whether their personal 
data are being processed, which data and which categories of data are being processed, 
the purposes of the processing, how they are being processed (manually or 
automatically), the right to request the rectification, erasure or blocking of data being 
processed, and to notify any third parties of any changes to the personal data requested 
by the data subject. It is assumed that this task requires two hours of legal validation 
(€500) and three hours of clerical work (€150), and that it is a cost which recurs on a 
5-yearly basis, in order to account for technological lifecycles, which would require 
adaptations in the information provided. 
(iii) Cost of Notifications of processing activities by data controllers to national data 
protection authorities: based on figures provided by national DPAs in their 2009 
Annual Reports, the total number of new notifications in the EU in 2009 were 
552,840. This figure was rounded up to 650.000 to account for 5 Member States that 
 121
did not submit their statistics (DE, ES, PT, HU and LV). From stakeholder feedback 
submitted in public consultations, the cost of each new notification is estimated at 
approximately €200 per notification168, comprising 4 hours work by a full-time 
clerical employee. This figure would include updates of existing notifications as the 
means of processing may change over time. As the figure of 650.000 refers to new 
notifications per year, the number in the Frequency column is 1. 
(iv) Prior Checking: This refers to the cost of notifying public authorities about 
processing which might present specific risks to the rights and freedoms of individuals 
(Article 20 of the Directive). This is estimated to involve 2 hours of legal validation (€ 
500) and 4 hours of clerical work (€200). There were approximately 15.000 prior 
checks reported to the Commission for 2009. This figure was rounded up to 16.000 to 
account for those Member States that did not report statistics on this.  
(v) Baseline costs of legal fragmentation in the internal market / national 
transpositions of Directive 95/46/EC: the calculation of the costs of legal 
fragmentation in terms of administrative burden is based on the following elements: 
• 10 hours of legal validation work to adapt the business model of the data controller 
to the data protection requirements of the additional Member States he is 
established in (€2,500) 
• €2,000 for translation costs (e.g. on information materials for data subjects, 
privacy policies, etc) 
• 10 hours of clerical work (€500)  
• It is assumed that this is a cost which recurs on a 5-yearly basis in order to account 
for technological lifecycles, which would require legal adaptations to ensure legal 
compliance. 
 
(b) Preferred Option 
(i) Introduction of an explicit principle of transparency: Line 1 refers to the 
introduction of a general principle of transparency on data controllers, which will 
practically translate into providing clear and intelligible information to data subjects. 
The obligation is estimated to involve two hours of clerical work for a full time 
employee. This will be a one-off cost of adapting to the new requirements of the data 
protection rules on transparency. 
(ii) Extending some obligations applicable to data controllers to data processors: it is 
assumed that a big majority of information obligations relating to data processors will 
be dealt with by data controllers upstream. Some obligations may be incurred by data 
processors (particularly as regards Line 3 – obligation to demonstrate compliance), but 
the number of processors affected is very difficult to estimate with any degree of 
certainty. 
(iii) Abolish the existing generalised system of notifications to DPAs: see Line 3 under 
the Baseline Scenario calculation. 
                                                 
168 This estimate is based on information received from the DPAs in NL and LU. For example, in Netherlands it 
takes about half a day to fulfil the notification requirement. In Luxembourg the company needs to complete 
3-4 forms and the estimated cost for each file is €100. The notification form used in the UK fits within these 
estimates, and it can be extrapolated that the situation is similar in most of the Member States. 
 122
(iv) Introduction of a general obligation for data controllers to demonstrate 
compliance with data protection law: Line 4 estimates the cost of providing 
information about compliance, involving 4 hours of clerical work by a full time 
employee to gather and prepare all the relevant information. Such information may 
include disclosures about the appointment of DPOs and the conducting of DPIAs. As 
this change includes among other the appointment of specially trained personnel and 
the conduct of risk assessments through the DPIA, is assumed that this action would 
need to be performed every 3 years, in order to account for technological lifecycles, 
which would require adaptations in the information provided.  
(v) Data breach notifications: Line 5 estimates the cost of data breach notifications; it is 
estimated that currently 3,000 data breach notifications take place in the EU for the 
telecoms sector, at a cost of 20,000 each (based on 319 data protection breaches 
reported to the UK DPA in 2008/2009 and extrapolated for the EU169; figure of costs 
based on stakeholder feedback and desk research). If notification is extended to all 
sectors, it is estimated that an extra 1,000 breach notifications would occur. The 
additional cost of notifying about them would therefore be in the order of 20 million 
per annum. 
(vi) Eliminating the costs of legal fragmentation: Line 6 mirrors line 4 of the baseline 
scenario, but with a negative prefix as the estimated annual costs will be eliminated. 
 
4. CONCLUSION 
The calculations in this annex estimate administrative burdens to amount to: 
• €5.257.752.500 per annum in the baseline scenario, of which approximately 
€2.911.143.000 is attributable to legal fragmentation.  
• €1.556.749.132 in savings per annum in the preferred option, vis-à-vis the baseline 
scenario (net change). 
 
 
                                                 
169 Based on 319 data protection breaches reported to the UK DPA in 2008/2009 and extrapolated for the EU; 
figure of costs based on stakeholder feedback and desk research. 
 123
 
ANNEX 10 
 
 IMPACTS OF THE PREFERRED OPTION ON  
COMPETITIVENESS  
 
8. EXPECTED IMPACTS OF THE PREFERRED POLICY OPTION ON THE COMPETITIVENESS OF 
THE EU ECONOMY 
This annex provides additional analysis of the expected impacts of the preferred policy option 
on the competitiveness of the European economy.  
The likely impacts are evaluated in terms of three dimensions of competitiveness: 
• Cost competitiveness: the cost of doing business, which includes the costs of factors 
of production (labour, capital and energy); 
• Capacity to innovate: the capacity of the business to produce more and/or better 
quality products and services that meet better customers' preferences 
• International competitiveness: the above two aspects could also be assessed in an 
international comparative perspective, so that the likely impact of the policy proposal 
on comparative advantages on the world markets is taken into account. 
As a horizontal initiative, the data protection reform has impacts on most industries. The 
personal data of natural persons is potentially processed in all sectors of the economy. The 
reform of European data protection rules will therefore introduce changes that cut across 
industrial sectors, and have a global impact on the economy of the EU. 
The envisaged approach of increasing harmonisation at EU level will have a significant 
impact on business and enhance the attractiveness of Europe as location to do business, at the 
same time as strengthening the EU in its global promotion of high data protection standards. 
In fact, while the reform puts individuals in a better position to exercise their data protection 
rights, it will also allow for significant cost reductions for businesses through more 
harmonisation.  
The current fragmentation of the legal framework gives rise to administrative burden costing 
EU businesses close to €3 billion per year. This cost could be removed and the resources 
made available could potentially be used by businesses to enhance their investment strategies, 
both within the EU and beyond. Thus, thanks to the reduced fragmentation of the regulatory 
environment, the EU will have a more predictable business environment in data protection, 
with a set of rules encouraging more consumer confidence and a better-functioning internal 
market. A multinational company operating in several Member States will no longer be 
subject to different requirements and the resulting costs and legal uncertainty. 
9. COST AND PRICE COMPETITIVENESS 
9.1. Cost of inputs 
The costs of doing cross-border business in the internal market will be reduced considerably 
by the clarification of the rules on applicable law, so that a data controller established or using 
equipment in more than one Member State will be subject to one single law only. As a result 
of the reform, businesses will have to comply with one set of common, harmonised rules for 
the processing of personal data and ensure that personal data flows without obstacles 
throughout the EU.  
 124
The data protection reform will create a level playing field for data controllers and reduce the 
administrative burden linked to notifications to Data Protection Authorities. Multinational 
companies with activities in more than one EU Member State will reap significant benefits 
from having to contact only one, single Data Protection Authority who will be responsible for 
their supervision, thus improving coherence and compliance and reducing costs. It will also 
reduce barriers to entry for potential new entrants, making the internal market more attractive 
and allowing them to fully exploit its potential.  
The objective of enhancing the internal market dimension of data protection is likely to have 
positive impacts on business cost efficiency, given that it proposes to: 
• establish a "one-stop-shop" for data controllers in the EU ensuring consistent 
enforcement of data protection rules, 
• rationalise the current governance system to help ensure a more consistent 
enforcement, 
• drastically cut red tape: remove unnecessary notification obligations for data 
controllers, 
• simplify requirements for international data transfers. 
Given these changes, the reform is expected to be positively received by economic operators, 
as it will reduce their overall compliance costs, particularly those linked to the currently 
fragmented rules and the data protection-related administrative burden.  
Taking account of the concerns of industry regarding the administrative and financial costs of 
implementing some of the proposed changes, and in particular to avoid the possibility of 
imposing disproportionate burdens on small companies, measures with a potential cost impact 
such as the appointment of Data Protection Officers and the conduct of data protection impact 
assessments, have  limitations and thresholds included in the relevant legal obligations, thus 
considerably limiting the cost impacts on SMEs. 
The reform is also likely to have a positive impact on consumer confidence in online 
environments, so that increased volume of transactions of goods and services through online 
channels can be expected. In addition to the providers of online services who benefit directly, 
this has the potential to benefit also the large supplier base which provides goods for online 
transactions, as well as sectors involved in the completion of online transactions, e.g. courier 
and postal services delivering the goods ordered online and related businesses. 
9.2. Cost of labour 
No material changes of data protection rules relating to employment relationships are 
proposed. Clarification and harmonisation of general data protection concepts will remove 
divergences and reduce costs caused by fragmentation. 
9.3. Other compliance costs   
The appointment of data protection officers will, for those organisations to which the 
obligation applies, impose additional costs to the extent that a comparable function does not 
already exist internally or in the form of an external consultancy contract. Data Protection 
Impact Assessments will also impose costs depending on the frequency and the level of 
scrutiny required.  
On the one hand, thresholds and limitations ensure that any additional costs remain 
proportionate to the volume of operations. On the other hand, both measures contribute 
considerably to increased compliance of the organisation, which can in the long term protect 
 125
it from expensive complaint handling, administrative investigation or litigation. This applies 
also to an obligation to demonstrate compliance by documenting internal policies and 
procedures. Furthermore, for data controllers established in more than one Member State, 
these additional compliance costs would be offset by the reduction of fragmentation (see also 
Annex 6). 
10. CAPACITY TO INNOVATE 
10.1. Capacity to produce and bring R&D to the market 
The current inconsistent implementation of EU data protection laws impacts the uptake of 
online services and new technologies in general. Individuals are affected because of a lack of 
trust in the digital environment and fears about possible misuse of their data. This creates 
opportunity costs for economic operators and public authorities and slows down innovation.  
Strong growth of the internet economy, widespread use of new mobile devices and the 
expansion of e-commerce and other web-based services could bring sizable economic 
benefits, and provide a strong platform for companies able to develop new products and 
services and to bring them to market. The EU has supported research and development in 
privacy friendly and privacy enhancing technologies, as well as in secure tools. Market 
acceptance of these technologies and tools will improve considerably when they are 
integrated into systems offered to a market of 500 million potential customers. 
10.2. Capacity for product innovation 
Clear and harmonised data protection rules can become a trigger for innovation. For example, 
privacy enhancing technologies or privacy by design and data protection consulting are 
sectors which could benefit from an environment where increased data protection safeguards 
are the norm. European industry could become world leaders in privacy enhancing 
technologies or privacy by design solutions, drawing business, jobs and capital to the 
European Union. Privacy enhancing tools for data transfer and aggregation, as well as cloud 
computing will generate new business opportunities.  
10.3. Capacity for process innovation (including distribution, marketing and after-sales 
services)  
Clarification and harmonisation of data protection rules across the EU offers a larger, more 
streamlined and more open market for investment and increases incentives for innovation.  
11. INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS 
11.1. Competition in internal market 
Clarification of data protection concepts and principles, more harmonisation of data 
protection law, clarification of applicable law and improved consistency of enforcement all 
contribute to creating a level playing field in the EU as far as data protection is concerned. 
They will remove incentives for forum shopping and the distortion of competition by diverse 
interpretation of existing principles. This will improve competition in the internal market and 
increase the resulting benefits in terms of subsequent downward pressure on prices and more 
innovative products and services.  
 126
11.2. Competition in external markets 
The fact that the EU is reforming its data protection rules to enhance individual rights can be 
perceived by many businesses as a competitive advantage, providing a business environment 
where the legitimate and safe processing of personal data is rewarded with the trust of more 
consumers. 
The change in rules, making the European internal market more effective and creating a more 
predictable regulatory environment is in turn expected to make Europe become a more 
attractive place for doing business, as the rules will be less heavy and more streamlined.  
The main elements in the preferred policy option contributing to this effect are the: 
 ¾ Clarification of applicable law, ensuring that only one law applies, 
 ¾ Simplification of the conditions and procedures for third country data transfers, 
including for groups of companies, 
 ¾ General reduction of red tape and fragmentation 
 ¾ Consistent and effective enforcement. 
EU based providers will be able to offer a service with higher quality in terms of data 
protection and security at competitive prices at a global scale. 
 
 127
11.3. Summary 
11.3.1. Impact on competitiveness 
 
 Data Processors /  controllers
Cost and price competitiveness Positive 
Cost of inputs Strong reduction of compliance costs. An estimated 
€2.2 billion in the administrative burden of legal 
fragmentation will be virtually eliminated by the 
increased harmonisation. 
 
 
Obligation (w
DPOs may im
businesses n
function. Intr
protection im
cost to a limi
Other compliance costs (e.g. reporting 
obligations) 
DPOs and DPIAs, as well as a general assessment 
of compliance, improve data protection compliance 
and reduce risk of cost for non-compliance for 
complaint-handling, administrative investigations 
or litigation and negative effects for brand and 
customer base. 
Introducing a
demonstrate 
law is estima
administrativ
Price of outputs  Improved consumer confidence in on-line trading 
environment expected to have positive impact on 
business ability to trade across borders and in 
competition. Level playing field in single market 
creates economy-of-scale benefits 
 
Capacity to innovate Positive 
Capacity to produce and bring R&D to 
the market 
Capacity for product innovation 
Improved by higher consumer confidence in 
providing data. Application of privacy by design 
principle and increased use of PETs enable 
development of new products and services using 
privacy as a competitive advantage. 
Capacity for process innovation 
(including distribution, marketing and 
after-sales services)  
Clarification and harmonisation of data protection 
rules across EU offers larger market for new 
developments and increases incentive for 
innovation  
 
International competitiveness Positive 
Market shares internal market Increased harmonisation will create a more level 
playing field for businesses and foster their intra-
EU and international competitiveness. 
  
 128
Market shares external markets Strong data protection can build consumer 
confidence and strengthen the potential of the 
market. Simplification of procedures for data 
transfers to third countries makes international 
cooperation easier and reduces costs. 
 
